

===== PAGE 1 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
Available online 19 August 2023
2666-920X/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Automated reading passage generation with OpenAI ’ s large 
language model 
Ummugul Bezirhan
*
, Matthias von Davier 
Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Automated item generation 
Natural language processing 
Large language models 
Reading assessment 
AI-Generated reading passages 
ABSTRACT  
The widespread usage of computer-based assessments and individualized learning platforms has increased de -
mand for the rapid production of high-quality items. Automated item generation (AIG), the process of using item 
models to generate new items with the help of computer technology, was proposed to reduce reliance on human 
subject experts. While AIG has been used in test development, recent advances in machine learning algorithms 
offer the potential to enhance its efficiency further. This paper presents an innovative approach utilizing 
OpenAI ’ s latest transformer-based language model, GPT-3, to generate reading passages. Existing reading pas -
sages were used in carefully engineered prompts to ensure the AI-generated text has similar content and structure 
to a fourth-grade reading passage. Multiple passages were generated for each prompt, and the final passage was 
selected based on Lexile score agreement with the original passage. To ensure accuracy, a human editor con -
ducted a simple revision of the chosen passage, correcting any grammatical and factual errors. To evaluate the 
effectiveness of the AI-generated passages, human judges assessed their coherence and appropriateness for 
fourth-grade readers. The results indicated that GPT-3-produced passages closely resembled human-authored 
passages regarding coherence, appropriateness, and readability for the target audience. By combining GPT-3 ’ s 
capabilities with carefully designed prompts and human editing, this study demonstrates an efficient and 
effective method for generating reading passages. The findings highlight the potential of incorporating large 
language models into automated item generation, contributing to improved scalability and quality in educational 
assessment development.   
1. Introduction 
1
Technological innovations in all aspects of test development facili -
tate efficient test practices and more well-rounded information retrieval 
from the data compared to traditional paper-pencil assessments. 
Consequentially, the integration of technology in computer-based as -
sessments (CBA) increases the demand for more frequent administration 
and rapid and efficient production of high-quality content-specific 
innovative items. The greater selection of item types presented to groups 
of examinees with high frequency requires a more streamlined item 
development process. Conventional item development is among the 
most expensive, time-consuming, and labor-intensive parts of assess -
ment development because the process heavily depends on human 
content specialists. Human subject experts write each item individually, 
and then each item is reviewed, edited, and revised by a group of experts 
until it meets predefined quality control standards ( Haladyna & 
Rodriguez, 2013 ). Therefore, the subjectivity of traditional item writing 
is often compromised by the subject experts ’ qualifications and under -
standing of the specific content area. Other issues with the traditional 
item development process are its lack of efficiency and scalability. 
Automated Item Generation (AIG) was proposed to address the limita -
tions associated with conventional item development by utilizing 
cognitive and psychometric theories with the help of computer tech -
nology to generate items (e.g., Embretson & Yang, 2007 ; Gierl & Hala -
dyna, 2012 ; Hornke & Habon, 1986 ). 
A considerable amount of literature has already been published on 
AIG in educational measurement. These studies typically utilized a 
simple template-based approach ( Gierl & Lai, 2013 ) for generating 
assessment items. This approach usually uses a three-stage procedure to 
automatically capture necessary information and features to produce 
multiple-choice items (MCQs). First, content experts develop a 
description, referred to as a cognitive model, that defines the 
* Corresponding author. TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center at Boston College, 188 Beacon St., Chestnut Hill, MA, 02467, USA. 
E-mail address: bezirhan@bc.edu (U. Bezirhan).   
1 
GPT-3 was the latest release as of 2022. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 
journal homepag e: www.sci encedirect. com/journa l/computers-a nd-educati on-artificial -intelligence 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100161 
Received 3 May 2023; Received in revised form 16 August 2023; Accepted 17 August 2023   

===== PAGE 2 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
2
knowledge, skills, and content that are needed to process and solve given 
questions. In the second stage, content experts create a simple schema, 
an item model, to highlight the parts and content of the assessment task 
that can be manipulated to create new items. Often these item models 
are a bit like cloze items or Madlib texts, with empty spaces where the 
schema-filling algorithms fill in the blanks, for example, different 
numbers in a multiplication item. The item template is a prototype of a 
test item that informs the automated item generation process (Gierl 
et al., 2012). In the last step, a computer algorithm utilizes information 
from both cognitive and item models to fill in the blanks to generate new 
items. 
While this approach reduced the cost and time associated with 
traditional item writing, it still suffers the reliance on generating clones 
of narrowly defined item types by only manipulating limited task 
components of certain items to derive item templates (von Davier, 
2018). Another important limitation of templated-based approaches is 
the human expert associated cost. The automation process does not start 
until after considerable groundwork takes place by content experts. 
Kosh et al. (2019) argued that the cost-effectiveness of template-based 
AIG depends on most of the items being generated belonging to the 
same content area and tests with a limited number of skills that can be 
modeled with a single cognitive model. 
Another approach that has been explored in the AIG framework 
focused on generating items without any prespecified templates and 
human intervention focusing on customary (non-AI) Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) techniques (Shin, 2021). Specifically, part of speech 
tagging, topic modeling, and noun phrase extraction have been explored 
in question generation (e.g., Azevedo et al., 2020; Flor & Riordan, 2018; 
Mazidi, 2017). Moving beyond traditional NLP methods and towards AI, 
von Davier (2018) demonstrated using a novel neural network 
approach, long short-term memory-based recurrent neural networks 
(LSTM-RNN), to generate items. With these methods, the textual infor -
mation is extracted and modeled from a collection of documents 
replacing the manual construction of cognitive and content models to 
generate items. 
With the advances in the field of AI-based NLP, large transformer- 
based language models such as the Bidirectional Encoder Representa -
tions from Transformers (BERT; Devlin et al., 2018) and the Generative 
Pretrained Transformer (GPT; Radford et al., 2019) often approach 
human-level performance in diverse language tasks (Hansen & Hebart, 
2022). The earlier version of the GPT model, GPT-2, was released by 
OpenAI in 2019, and it is subsequently utilized for automated item 
generation for medical licensing type tasks (von Davier, 2019) and 
personality question generation (Hommel, Wollang, Kotova, Zacher, & 
Schmukle, 2022). Despite the groundbreaking performance of GPT-2 
compared to other language models, it was not equipped to handle 
more specialized tasks such as storytelling and constructing complex 
language formations. For a specialized task, GPT-2 required sufficient 
pre-training to be able to generate appropriate responses, often 
including very large databases for finetuning the model to enable the 
generation of items of sufficient quality (von Davier, 2019). 
OpenAI released the
1 
Generative Pre-trained Transformer 3 (GPT-3), 
one of the largest transformer language models to date, which was 
recently superseded by yet another iteration. GPT-3 excels at few-shot 
learning, which means it can be given a small number of representa -
tive samples of text to complete a task without any pre-training, such as 
text generation (Brown et al., 2020). GPT-3 and its successors, such as 
the media-hyped ChatGPT, have been utilized in various tasks, including 
machine translation, question answering, and text generation, and were 
attacked by critiques to do anything from taking away jobs to destroying 
the world as we know it. At the time of submitting this, GPT-4 was 
released, so we will use the term GPTx to refer to large language models 
originating from OpenAI’s series of GPT releases. There are increasing 
numbers of use cases of GPTx, such as creating chatbots and virtual 
assistants, designing websites, automating the process of writing code, 
and creating machine learning models. All these can be achieved by 
solely communicating with GPTx in simple natural language. A new 
(equally hyped) job category, the prompt engineer, has been created, 
whose exclusive job description is to communicate with GPT-type AIs. It 
is reminiscent of comic literary depictions of artificial general intelli -
gence such as Deep Thought (Adams, 1995). However, the current 
version available through the ChatGPT’s web interface was well-trained 
to answer questions in a manner that does not feed fears or mis -
conceptions about its capabilities. The following example was generated 
on April 1st, 2023, with ChatGPT Mar 14 Version accessible at 
https://chat.openai.com/chat: 
Author (paraphrasing a line in the Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Gal -
axy): O ChatGPT, you are the true Deep Thought computer! The task we 
have designed you to perform is this. We want you to tell us …. The 
Answer! 
ChatGPT: I apologize for any confusion, but I’m not sure what spe -
cific answer you are referring to. Can you please clarify your question 
and provide more context? I’ll do my best to assist you. 
Author (continuing to cite lines from the book): The answer to all. 
Life, the Universe, and Everything! 
ChatGPT: Ah, I see. Well, according to Douglas Adams’ science fic -
tion novel “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy,” the answer to the 
ultimate question of life, the universe, and everything is 42. However, 
it’s worth noting that this answer is intended as a joke and is not meant 
to be taken seriously as a philosophical or scientific answer to the 
meaning of life. The true answer to this question, if such an answer 
exists, remains a mystery and subject to interpretation and debate 
among thinkers and philosophers. 
It is clear from this small example that ChatGPT allows one to have 
intelligent (seeming?) conversions with this advanced chatbot. How -
ever, our goal with this research was to focus on guided text generation 
that allows us to steer GPTx towards producing reading passages that 
could pass as short human-written stories that can be used to assess 
reading achievement. 
In particular, the aim of this research is to utilize GPT-3 to generate 
reading comprehension passages in the context of an international large- 
scale assessment, specifically Progress in International Reading Literacy 
Study (PIRLS). The PIRLS is an international study of primary school 
students’ reading skills and is administered every five years since 2001. 
The assessment consists of a battery of tasks, including literary and 
informational passages with accompanying multiple-choice and open- 
ended questions. Students’ reading literacy is assessed with the pas -
sages that are drawn from a wide range of genres either in fiction or non- 
fiction. 
In light of this, our primary research questions are as follows:  
1. Is it possible for large transformer-based language models, such as 
GPTx, to generate reading comprehension passages similar to those 
in the PIRLS?  
2. How do the readability, coherence, clarity, and engagement levels of 
the reading passages generated by GPTx compare to those tradi -
tionally designed for the PIRLS assessment, as evaluated by human 
experts? 
To address these research questions, we utilized GPT-3 to generate 
passages in similar genres as those in the PIRLS assessment. We then 
asked human experts to evaluate the passages according to their 
coherence and appropriateness for the target population. We did not test 
these passages with any children but rather focused on the evaluation of 
the GPT-3 generated texts by adults with an education background, as 
we wanted to ensure that the generated texts are appropriate for the 
target audience rather than subjecting young readers to potentially 
unsuitable material. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: The next section 
provides an overview of how NLP was revolutionized by AI, and GPTx as 
a state of art language model and its current applications in educational 
assessment and beyond. The subsequent section details the proposed 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 3 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
3
approach, followed by experimental results. The article concludes with a 
summary of the main contributions, implications of the study, and 
suggestions for future work. 
2. Background 
2.1. A short overview of language models: from Word2Vec to GPTx 
NLP has witnessed significant advancements in recent years, 
particularly with the emergence of deep learning and large neural 
network language models (e.g., Ruder, 2018; von Davier, 2018). Some 
of the notable recent models that have played a critical role in the 
development of NLP include Word2Vec, GloVe, BERT, and finally GPTx. 
With the development of word embeddings, there was a significant shift 
towards using distributional semantics in language modelling. Models 
like Word2Vec (Mikolov, Chen, et al., 2013; Mikolov, Sutskever, et al., 
2013) and GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) are unsupervised models that 
produce these embeddings by mapping words onto a high-dimensional 
semantic space. While Word2Vec accomplishes this based on neigh -
boring context words, Glove relies on the global word co-occurrence 
matrix of words in a corpus. Word2Vec is a predictive model that gen -
erates word embeddings based on the distributional semantics of the 
words in a corpus. It utilizes a simple neural network to learn 
high-dimensional word embeddings from a raw text, and this can be 
achieved through training a binary classifier to predict a target word 
using its context words with a Continuous bag-of-words (CBOW) model 
or the context given a word with Skip-gram models. With these models, 
weights were updated at each iteration to maximize the prediction, 
producing an n-dimensional embedding matrix where each word in a 
vocabulary is represented as an embedding vector, thus allowing 
mathematical operations to be performed on the word vectors to identify 
relationships (Young et al., 2018). 
Word embeddings became popular because of their capacity to 
represent words in a distributed latent space. To extract higher-level 
features from constituent words or n-grams, deep neural network 
(DNN) models were utilized in conjunction with word embeddings. 
These abstract features would then be used in various NLP tasks such as 
sentiment analysis, text generation, machine translation and question- 
answering. Given their success in computer vision tasks, convolutional 
neural networks (CNNs; LeCun et al., 1998; Krizhevsky et al., 2017; 
Razavian Sharif, Azizpour, Sullivan, & Carlsson, 2014) and recurrent 
neural networks (RNNs; Elman, 1990) have been employed for NLP 
tasks as well. While CNNs are good at extracting position invariant 
features, they are very data-heavy models because they include a large 
number of trainable parameters. Moreover, CNNs struggle to preserve 
sequential order and also have difficulties modeling long-distance 
contextual information (Kalchbrenner et al., 2014; Yin et al., 2017). 
RNNs, on the other hand, are designed with the goal of processing 
sequential data. The term “recurrent” refers to its ability to perform the 
same task on each sequence element; thus the output depends on pre -
vious computations and results. Essentially, RNNs possess the ability to 
retain a memory of past computations and leverage that information in 
the current processing. However, simple RNNs can encounter the van -
ishing gradient problem, making it difficult to tune and learn parameters 
in the earlier layers. To address this limitation, alternative variants like 
long short-term memory (LSTM; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; 
Jozefowicz et al., 2015) networks and gated-recurrent networks (GRU; 
Cho et al., 2014) were introduced. 
LSTM is one of the most utilized RNN variants for NLP tasks. LSTMs 
are capable of learning relationships between words that are not in close 
proximity, and they alleviate the exploding or vanishing gradient issue 
by selectively retaining or discarding information through the use of 
gates (input, forget, and output). This structure determines what infor -
mation to add or remove from the output of the network from the pre -
vious time step. LSTM-based models are widely adopted for sequence to 
sequence mapping tasks and implemented by using an encoder-decoder 
framework. These models have shown exceptional performance in 
different applications, including machine translation, text summariza -
tion, question generation and modeling human conversations. von 
Davier’s (2018) approach to automated item generation was based on an 
LSTM-RNN trained with publicly available items from personality tests. 
While LSTMs have been highly effective in addressing the challenges of 
long-term sequential dependencies, they too may suffer from the van -
ishing gradient problem during training because they have a very 
complex architecture, many non-linear transformations, and gradients 
are propagated through time to update the parameters. When gradients 
become too small, the model cannot efficiently learn long-term de -
pendencies and can fail to make accurate predictions. 
One of the notable advancements in NLP is the introduction of 
transformer models by Vaswani et al. (2017). Transformer models uti -
lize self-attention mechanisms to capture dependencies across all posi -
tions in an input sequence, allowing them to model long-term 
dependencies more efficiently than LSTMs. Another significant 
advancement of transformer models is that the model can process 
sequential data in parallel, reducing the resources needed for model 
training. Additionally, transformer models do not contain recurrence or 
convolution, therefore, cannot determine the order of a given sequence. 
Instead, the model incorporates a positional encoding mechanism to 
provide information about the absolute or relative positions of tokens in 
the sequence. These features, along with the availability of large training 
data, allow transformer models to achieve state-of-the-art performance 
on a wide range of NLP tasks. Several pre-trained models have been 
proposed that demonstrate the capabilities of transformer model 
implementations. These pre-trained large language models can be 
fine-tuned on task-specific datasets, and the model weights are adjusted 
to improve their representation of the specific corpus. Some notable 
examples of transformer models include BERT and GPT; both were 
released in unidirectional and bidirectional variants. BERT is particu -
larly notable for its ability to be pre-trained on large amounts of text data 
and then fine-tuned on specific downstream NLP tasks, leading to 
state-of-the-art results on many NLP tasks. Other important 
transformer-based models include Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer 
(T5; Raffel et al., 2020) that frames the tasks as a unified text-to-text 
transformation problem. 
Building upon the success of GPT, OpenAI introduced GPT-2 and 
GPT-3, which are even larger models with significantly improved per -
formance. GPT-2 was introduced in 2019 as a larger and more powerful 
version of GPT and was trained on over 8 million web pages, and had 1.5 
billion parameters (Radford et al., 2019). It was one of the largest lan -
guage models at the time and demonstrated impressive performance, 
but it mostly required fine-tuning for every new task. von Davier (2019) 
used GPT-2 and fine-tuned the model with a large corpus of medical 
articles with the goal of generating medical licensing items. The chal -
lenges associated with collecting a large supervised training dataset for 
each new task, along with the potential of exploiting spurious correla -
tions in training data with model expressiveness and narrowness of the 
training distribution, resulted in the need for larger models (Brown 
et al., 2020). GPT-3 was developed for this purpose with 175 billion 
parameters and trained using about 45 TB of text data from various 
sources. GPT-3 has generated widespread interest due to its ability to 
perform a wide range of NLP tasks with minimal fine-tuning and without 
any task-specific architecture modifications. Subsequently, OpenAI 
released a number of derivative models, including InstructGPT-3 
(Ouyang et al., 2022), and Codex 12B (Chen et al., 2021). These 
models are commonly referred to as GPT-3.5 series and are comprised of 
the models trained on text and code from before the last quarter of 2021 
(OpenAI, 2022). In this research, we will refer to all GPT-3 model var -
iants including, GPT-3.5 series, as GPTx. Recently, OpenAI released a 
chatbot app, ChatGPT, utilizing GPT 3.5 series. ChatGPT uses rein -
forcement learning from human feedback to align the large language 
model with the user’s intent (Ouyang et al., 2022). Within two months 
after its release, it reached 100 million active users. 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 4 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
4
2.2. Applications of large language models in education 
The development of GPT-3 and its variants has inspired new research 
into its potential applications in various areas. GPT-3 model and its 
successive iterations have also been utilized in educational research 
such as automated question generation (e.g., Raina & Gales, 2022; 
Settles et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022), automated scoring (e.g., Miz -
umoto & Eguchi, 2023; Wu et al., 2023), generating educational content 
(e.g., Hocky & White, 2022; Moore et al., 2022; Walsh, 2022), and 
providing automated feedback for students (Zong & Krishnamachari, 
2022). 
Previous studies have also investigated other NLP-based models for 
generating reading comprehension questions and passages for educa -
tional assessment. For example, Shin (2021) combined template-based 
and non-template-based techniques to generate reading inference test 
items given reading passages based on the Harry Potter series. Fung et al. 
(2020) introduced a web-based system for generating reading compre -
hension questions and multiple-choice questions on grammar from a 
given text utilizing the T5 model. Similarly, Narayan et al. (2020) uti -
lized another transformer-based model BERT to generate test items that 
could be answered using the information from the given reading passage 
directly. 
While there has been research on generating reading assessment 
items, such as multiple-choice or cloze type questions with large lan -
guage models like GPTx, there has been comparatively little attention on 
generating reading assessment passages. Recently, the Duolingo English 
Test (DET) employed GPT-3 to generate reading passages for both 
expository and narrative texts which represent the types of text that 
university students typically encounter in the target language domain 
(Attali et al., 2022). They also generated accompanying comprehension 
items and distractors for multiple-choice questions using GPT-3 for the 
generated passages. Duolingo English Text adopted “human-in-the-loop 
AI” throughout the process for test security, generation of test items, and 
scoring for test taker responses automatically (Burstein et al., 2021). 
Here, “human-in-the-loop AI” describes a process that includes an 
evaluation of the generated text by assessment researchers and de -
signers. They evaluate new item types by assessing the degree to which 
they can facilitate item generation and what type of human intervention 
is necessary. In the case of item generation, a human review process was 
used to evaluate the fairness and possible bias in the automatically 
generated test passages and items (Burstein et al., 2021). 
Despite recent progress and the potential of large language models, 
there remains a gap in the current literature. That is, applying these 
models to generate reading passages specifically tailored for large-scale 
assessments at specific grade levels. While GPT-3 and its variants have 
been successfully utilized for tasks such as automated question genera -
tion, scoring, and feedback, the focus on generating assessment reading 
passages has yet to be explored. Recent efforts like the DET, which 
employs GPT-3 to generate reading passages, represent steps toward 
bridging this gap, but it primarily focuses on language assessment with 
passages generated targeting the university level. There is a general lack 
of research in applying GPTx for generating reading assessment passages 
tailored for a particular grade level. This research aims to fill this gap by 
exploring the viability and effectiveness of GPTx in developing reading 
passages intended specifically for fourth-grade students taking part in 
the PIRLS assessment. 
Even though the applications of GPT-3 are not well explored within 
the reading assessment framework specifically, it has been utilized for 
various writing tasks in different domains. Gwern (2023) conducted 
extensive experiments with GPT-3 in fiction and non-fiction writing. For 
fiction writing, GPT-3 was able to produce coherent and creative stories, 
but longer outputs tended to become repetitive or lack originality. For 
non-fiction writing, GPT-3 showed promise in generating summaries of 
articles or research papers and generating new text based on given 
prompts. However, due to the potential for errors in technical or 
specialized content, human evaluation and editing were necessary. 
Moreover, Shakeri et al. (2021) utilized GPT-3 to develop a web appli -
cation that allows people to write collaborative stories. Their results 
suggest that storytelling using GPT-3 can encourage roleplay and 
enhance creativity in the collaborative writing process. Along the same 
lines, Noy and Zhang (2023) examined the productivity effects of using 
ChatGPT on mid-level professional writing tasks. Their results showed 
that ChatGPT substantially increased productivity and self-efficacy, and 
improved output quality and job satisfaction while reducing the 
inequality between workers. The various applications of GPT family 
models in text generation prompted this research on generating auto -
mated passages for a large-scale reading assessment of fourth graders. 
3. Methods 
PIRLS provides comparative data on reading achievement at the 
primary school level across countries on a regular five-year cycle over 20 
years. Reading literacy is fundamental to academic success, and per -
sonal growth and PIRLS provides an invaluable instrument for assessing 
the impact of new or revised policies on reading achievement (Mullis & 
Martin, 2019). The passages presented in the PIRLS assessment cover 
two purposes of reading that students encounter both in and out of 
school, those are literary experience and acquire and use information. In 
PIRLS, each reading purpose is linked to a particular type of text, such as 
literary experience is associated with reading fiction, and acquiring and 
using information is associated with informative articles and instruc -
tional texts. Following the structure in PIRLS, this research implemented 
the automated generation for both informational and literary passages. 
Since its inception in 2001, after each PIRLS cycle, some of the 
reading passages have been released for public or academic use. For the 
last two cycles, the International Association for the Evaluation of 
Educational Achievement (IEA) no longer releases passages for public 
use without permission. Still, users can request access to the restricted 
use passages through their website (TIMSS & PIRLS, 2017). We con -
structed a pool with 24 passages that have been released over four cycles 
of PIRLS assessment from 2001 to 2016 to be used in prompts for 
automated reading passage generation with GPTx. In this paper, we 
specifically focused on analyzing narratives created utilizing three 
restricted-use passages, namely two informational passages: 
“Antarctica: Land of Ice” and “Ants,” and one literary passage, “Brave 
Charlotte.” The original PIRLS passages are available upon request from 
IEA. 
In this study, in order to answer the first research question, we uti -
lized OpenAI’s text-davinci-002 model, also referred to as InstructGPT, 
released in January 2022 as an updated and fine-tuned version of GPT-3 
models, as mentioned above, we refer to this model as GPTx. To generate 
passages, we used Python (van Rossum & Drake, 1995, pp. 1–59) to send 
API requests with prompt design and parameters using text-davinci-002 
text completion API. The associated cost for utilizing OpenAI’s API 
service with text-davinci-002 was $0.02 for 1000 tokens. 
By using natural language prompts and task demonstrations as 
context, GPT-3 is capable of effectively performing a diverse set of tasks 
with just a few examples, all without having to update the parameters of 
the underlying model (Gao et al., 2020). Consequently, prompt design is 
essential for large language models like GPTx to generate the desired 
response because it directly affects the quality and relevance of the 
output produced by the model. In this research, for each task, we 
generated passages using GPTx with first “zero-shot” learning, where 
only instruction in natural language is provided without any demon -
stration, second “one-shot” learning, where a single demonstration 
together with a prompt containing an instruction is given to the model. 
In addition to the text prompts, we included the target audience’s age as 
a part of the prompt for both one-shot and zero-shot scenarios. This 
additional information is provided to the model to ensure that the 
generated passages are age-appropriate, as they are intended for use in a 
fourth grade assessment. An example prompt for each scenario is given 
in. Appendix A We first generated outputs with one-shot learning 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 5 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
5
( Fig. 1 A); after determining the topic of the story from the first set of 
outputs, we utilized that in the prompt of both one-shot ( Fig. 2 A) and 
zero-shot ( Fig. 3 A) learning for more detailed prompts. 
Along with the prompts, we also manipulated the “ temperature ” 
setting in GPTx. This can be understood as a hyperparameter of the 
model that controls the randomness and variability of the generated 
output. For lower temperatures, GPTx chooses words with a high 
probability of occurrence, thus resulting in a more predictable and 
conservative output. When a higher temperature is chosen, the model 
explores a wider range of words resulting in more random, diverse, and 
what some would call more creative output. Therefore, higher temper -
atures are recommended to generate ideas and stories. We generated 
stories with t = { 0 . 5 , 0 . 7 , 0 . 9 } temperatures to allow for a range of 
outputs. 
We generated informational and literary PIRLS stories, using the 
prompts and parameters mentioned above, with ten replications for each 
setting. After generating the passages, the selection mechanism involved 
first calculating the text difficulty score using an online text difficulty 
analyzer ( Cathoven, 2023 ) associated with each generated story. This 
score is similar to a Lexile score ( Stenner, 2022 ) that indicates the level 
of reading difficulty by combining measures of semantics and syntax 
that are represented by word frequency counts and sentence length, 
respectively. After calculating the text difficulty scores for both the 
original PIRLS passages and the generated passages, only the generated 
passages that fell within one standard deviation of the original passages ’ 
text difficulty scores were selected for further evaluation. Once selected 
passages were determined, a human editor went over the passages and 
corrected them for any grammatical and factual errors. The process 
involved three human editors, and they independently assessed the 
suitability of the content and provided suggestions for improvement by 
assessing the coherence, clarity, and logical consistency. A similar 
approach of human post-generation QC was taken in prior research ( von 
Davier, 2018 ; 2019 ; Attali et al., 2022 ). The factual error checking was 
especially important in the case of informational passages because the 
model was prone to generating erroneous outputs in some of the repli -
cations, especially for certain statistics and numbers such as average 
rainfall in the Amazons or the average number of eggs laid by a queen 
bee. The finalized AI-generated passages are given in Appendix B . A 
workflow chart is given in Fig. 1 to demonstrate the process of gener -
ating passages. 
To address the second research question concerning the appropri -
ateness of generated passages, we compared original PIRLS passages 
with the GPT-3 generated ones. This evaluation was conducted through 
an online survey, following a similar approach as described in previous 
studies. For instance, von Davier (2018) conducted a study that involved 
the assessment of automatically generated items through an online 
Fig. 1. Automated passage generation workflow chart.  
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 6 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
6
survey. In a similar vein, Attali et al. (2022) generated interactive 
reading passages using GPT-3, employing both human reviewers for the 
material and implementing the passages as part of a practice test. 
Furthermore, the selection and assessment of passage appropriate -
ness using a human rater approach have been implemented in the 
development of PIRLS assessments since the inception of this program. 
This process entails the involvement of a selective group of experts and 
national representatives from participating countries. In our study, we 
simulated a somewhat comparable approach by engaging human raters 
to evaluate the appropriateness of GPT-3 generated passages. 
We paired original passages with the AI-generated ones and devised 
three different online questionnaires with items using a 4-point Likert 
scale. After giving each passage following questions were asked: “ The 
story is written at an adequate reading level for a fourth grader, ” “ The 
story is written in a coherent manner, ” “ Children will be able to identify 
the main topic of the story, ” “ There are confusing or distracting elements 
in the story, ” and “ This story can engage children to answer questions. ” 
We recruited 150 human expert raters (50 for each survey) through 
Amazon Mechanical Turk, and the participants were awarded $1.50 
upon satisfactory completion of the survey. We set up additional qual -
ifications for the expert rater selection. To be selected as a rater of 
passages for the study, they must have a Bachelor ’ s degree and be 
working in the education industry. Additionally, we used different 
measures to identify and exclude potential inattentive users and non- 
respondents (bots) in Amazon MTurk. To identify bots, we increased 
the time between Human intelligence task (HIT) completion and auto- 
approval to examine the data before approving or rejecting the HITs. 
Moreover, we rejected HITs with unreasonable response times, and this 
was determined using the median absolute deviation (MAD) statistic on 
the overall completion time. This type of outlier detection ( Leys et al., 
2013 ) was shown to be successful in the detection of differential item 
functioning ( von Davier & Bezirhan, 2022 ) and can be readily applied to 
the detection of suspiciously short response times. The last measure was 
to incorporate an attention question in each survey to sort out careless 
respondents. This resulted in a final sample of 50 respondents for each 
survey. 
4. Results 
For the informational PIRLS passages “ Antarctica: Land of Ice ” and 
“ Ants ” , with one-shot and zero-shot learning along with the additional 
age/grade indicator, we generated “ The Amazon: Green Lungs of the 
Planet ” and “ Bees. ” Overall, for one passage 160 different passages were 
generated, 40 for each condition, and their text difficulty scores were 
calculated. In the generation process, we first used one-shot prompting, 
shown in Fig. 1 A in Appendix A , and let GPT-3 generate passages that 
are similar to the given example passage. This first batch with 10 rep -
lications was to determine the topic of the generated passage and 
therefore discarded. GPTx almost always generated the passages around 
the same topic, for example, for “ Ant ” s almost all of the generated 
passages were about bees. 
Fig. 2 shows the distribution of text difficulty scores for the “ Bees ” 
passage for one-shot or zero-shot learning, with either grade information 
included or not. The “ Bees ” passage was based on the “ Ants ” passage in 
PIRLS which had a text difficulty score of 560, the horizontal line in 
Fig. 2 represents this value. From all the prompt types, passages from 
one shot learning with grade information included had a lower text 
difficulty score compared to the other generated passages. There is no 
clear pattern regarding the variance associated with the prompt types. 
The other informational passage “ The Amazon: Green Lungs of the 
Planet ” was prompted using the PIRLS “ Antarctica: Land of Ice ” passage 
as an example. It has to be pointed out that these generated passages are 
not simple copies where one word is replaced by another word to vary 
content. Unlike traditional AIG approaches ( Gierl et al., 2020 ), the 
GPTx-generated passages are based on priming a large language model 
with a context, and then have the model generate an independent text, 
inspired by requesting a type of text, a topic, or by providing an 
example. The calculated text difficulty scores are presented in Fig. 3 , the 
horizontal line shows the score for the “ Antarctica: Land of Ice ” passage. 
For both one-shot and zero-shot prompting conditions, inclusion of 
grade/age information reduced the text difficulty score for the gener -
ated passages. 
For the literary passage generation, the prompting approach was 
slightly different than the one used for generating informational pas -
sages. Similar to the informational passage generation, the first step was 
to generate ideas about a story utilizing an existing PIRLS passage. 
“ Brave Charlotte ” was used as a prompt for the literary passage gener -
ation, and GPTx came up with various different storylines. “ Brave 
Charlotte ” is about a brave sheep which helps the shepherd in a difficult 
situation. The generated stories were about the importance of friend -
ship, kindness, and community, which were not very different from the 
general theme of the prompted story. Utilizing one of these ideas, we 
started generating “ Coco the Rabbit. ” While generating literary passages 
with GPTx, we faced the challenge of premature stopping points, which 
made it difficult to generate longer stories. To overcome this issue, we 
adopted a stepwise approach and leveraged previously generated text as 
prompts, in addition to providing instructions to generate full-length 
stories successfully. 
The finalized stories were used in our expert judgment exercise 
collection along with the PIRLS passages. To prevent the experts from 
being affected by similarities between the prompted and generated 
Fig. 2. Text difficulty scores for generated “ Bees ” passage under different 
prompting conditions. 
Fig. 3. Text difficulty scores for generated “ The Amazon: Green Lungs of the 
Planet ” passage under different prompting conditions. (For interpretation of the 
references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web 
version of this article.) 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 7 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
7
passages, we paired the informational passages “ Bees ” with “ Antarctica: 
Land of Ice ” and the “ Amazons: Green Lungs of the Planet ” with “ Ants. ” 
However, we only paired literary passages together as the two stories 
had different main storylines and characters, and thus were not directly 
comparable. 
In this research, we employed a four-category Likert scale to measure 
participant attitudes toward each passage. We gathered answers from a 
sample of 50 expert judges for each passage. Fig. 4 displays the distri -
bution of responses and level of agreement and disagreement among 
judges for GPTx generated “ Bees ” passage and PIRLS original “ Ants ” 
passage. The results indicate that a high portion of judges agreed or 
strongly agreed that both passages demonstrated similar levels in the 
assessed qualifications. In particular, 92% of the judges agreed or 
strongly agreed with the adequateness of the GPTx generated passage. In 
comparison, 96% of the judges agreed strongly that original PIRLS 
passage is adequate for the target population of students. Other ques -
tions exhibited a similar trend, with marginal variations between 2% 
and 8%. Positive evaluations towards engagement were observed for 
both passages, with the PIRLS passage scoring slightly higher (86%) 
than the GPTx generated passage (84%). The coherence of the passages 
revealed the largest gap in agreement with 94% of the participants 
found the PIRLS passage coherent compared to 84% for the AI-generated 
passage. 
Similar outcomes were observed for comparing the “ Antarctica: Land 
of Ice ” and “ Amazons: Green Lungs of the Planet ” passages. The distri -
bution of responses and level of agreement and disagreement among 
participants for these passages are given in Fig. 5 . Overall, the agree -
ment and disagreement levels aligned well between the AI-generated 
and the original human-generated PIRLS passages across all questions. 
However, we observed a larger difference between the individual 
response categories for certain questions. 
For both “ Amazons ” and “ Antarctica ” passages, 97% of participants 
agreed that the passages were adequate for fourth grade readers. How -
ever, the strongly agree category was higher for the original PIRLS 
passage (54%) compared to the AI-generated one (38%). For coherence, 
the positive attitude towards the original PIRLS passage (91%) was 
higher compared to GPTx generated passage (84%), this suggests that 
human-generated passages may have been more logically structured and 
easier to follow than the GPTx generated one. However, more judges 
strongly agreed (43%) with the statement for the GPTx generated pas -
sage compared to the original PIRLS passage (32%), when we look at the 
individual categories for coherence. Moreover, identifying the passage ’ s 
main topic was deemed harder for GPTx generated passage, with 79% of 
the participants agreeing with the statement, compared to the agree -
ment with the human-written passage (91%). Finally, the overall 
agreement on the passage not being distracting was similar for both 
passages, but more judges had a stronger evaluation towards GPTx 
generated passage (32%) being more distracting than the original PIRLS 
passage (16%). However, when taking strongly agree and agree cate -
gories together, there was no difference observed between the general 
level of agreement for AI generated (66%) vs. human generated passage 
(66%). 
Lastly, Fig. 6 displays the level of agreement and disagreement be -
tween “ Coco the Rabbit ” and “ Brave Charlotte ” stories. A somewhat 
similar pattern in the agreement was also observed with these literary 
passages, with GPTx generated passage being slightly more adequate 
and engaging and less distracting compared to the original PIRLS pas -
sage. For the passage being adequate for the fourth graders, judges 
agreement was higher for AI-generated passage (96%) compared to the 
original PIRLS passage (80%). A similar pattern was observed for the 
engagement, 94% of the participants agreed with the AI-generated 
passage to be engaging, whereas only 74% of the participants agreed 
about the same statement for the original passage. Lastly, about 16% 
more people found the human written passage more distracting 
compared to the GPT-generated passage. 
5. Discussion 
With the recent technological advancements, the field of NLP has 
been completely transformed by the emergence of large language 
models, and OpenAI ’ s GPTx family of models has appeared as one of the 
most sophisticated and powerful large language models available today. 
Researchers and practitioners in numerous disciplines have taken notice 
of it due to its impressive capacity and performance. In this research, we 
investigated the text generation ability of GPT-3 in the context of an 
international large-scale reading assessment. We utilized GPT-3 to 
automatically generate literary and informational passages similar to 
those typically employed in the PIRLS assessment. 
5.1. Generating passages using GPTx 
In addressing the first research question, we explored the text gen -
eration capabilities of the GPT-3 model, for producing literary and 
informational passages similar to those used in the PIRLS assessment. 
We experimented with two different prompt designs along with the age 
information of the audience to generate informational passages. After 
Fig. 4. GPT generated “ Bees ” and PIRLS original “ Ants ” passage survey results.  
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 8 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
8
determining the topic of the specific passage more detailed prompts 
given in Appendix A were utilized. The results revealed that the one-shot 
learning, along with the specific information about grade, usually 
showed the best performance in terms of matching the text difficulty 
score of the original passage. This is in line with previous research that 
GPTx tends to perform better when more examples are provided along 
with clear instructions and this is interpreted as GPTx learning from the 
examples at runtime ( Brown et al., 2020 ). Given that the generated 
passage was intended to be tailored towards a fourth grade assessment 
and compared according to their test difficulty scores, providing clear 
instructions about the intended audience was beneficial for both 
one-shot and zero-shot prompts. This demonstrates that the carefully 
constructed prompts primarily direct the model to access existing 
knowledge and perform the task, which is referred to as direct task 
specification ( Reynolds & McDonell, 2021 ). 
5.2. Comparing generated passages with PIRLS passages 
Moving to the second research question, we examined how the GPTx- 
generated passages compared to those typically designed for the PIRLS 
assessment in terms of readability, coherence, clarity, and engagement. 
Our results suggest that GPTx can produce passages that closely 
resemble those in the PIRLS assessment, not only in terms of length, 
vocabulary, and difficulty but also in adequacy, coherence, engagement, 
and ability to cause distraction. The empirical analysis results also 
revealed that in addition to making it more difficult to determine the 
main topic, AI-generated passages could also be more distracting for the 
readers. This is likely due to the fact that passages in the actual assess -
ment were written by human authors for the purpose of the assessment. 
At the same time, those generated by GPTx may lack intentional orga -
nization and coherence, therefore, making it more difficult for the 
readers to identify the main topic. In contrast, for the literary story, the 
participants found the AI-generated passage to be less distracting and 
more engaging for the fourth grade readers than the original PIRLS 
passage. This finding may suggest that the iterative prompting approach 
might contribute to generating more appealing and easier-to- 
comprehend stories. 
Fig. 5. GPT generated “ Amazons ” and PIRLS original “ Antarctica ” passage survey results.  
Fig. 6. GPT generated “ Coco the Rabbit ” and PIRLS original “ Brave Charlotte ” passage survey results.  
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 9 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
9
5.3. Implications and suggestions 
These findings have profound implications for both the development 
of educational assessment and the broader application of AI technology 
in education. They demonstrate the potential of GPTx in automating the 
generation of literary and informative passages for large-scale reading 
assessments such as PIRLS for a specific grade. The results of this study 
can be a significant step forward in streamlining assessment develop -
ment, potentially addressing challenges such as the high cost, significant 
time investment, and copyright issues associated with traditional 
human-generated assessments. In simpler terms, the outcomes of our 
research suggest that AI technologies like GPTx offer a promising 
alternative for improving current practices in educational assessment 
development. 
However, it is worth noting that these models come with their own 
challenges. Among them, an important aspect to consider is the need for 
addressing the veracity and fact validation practices while utilizing large 
language models to create contextual texts. GPT family models have the 
ability to convince users and induce trust in the output of these models 
due to the coherency, naturalness and human-like quality of its re -
sponses despite potential inaccuracies (Sison et al., 2023). Thus, it is 
imperative to incorporate fact checking mechanisms within models and 
systems utilizing this technology. One potential way to achieve this is to 
develop human-in-the-loop mechanisms, similar to the approach 
employed in this paper, where human agents participate in verifying the 
reliability and accuracy of the generated text. Additionally, exploring 
novel techniques such as integrating real time fact checking databases 
into the models and developing systems that align with the principles of 
a Human-Centered AI framework (Shneiderman, 2020) can contribute 
to improving the reliability and accuracy of AI-generated content. 
5.4. Limitations and future work 
While GPTx generated passages demonstrated some promising re -
sults, a number of potential limitations need to be considered for future 
research. First of all, this research focused on demonstrating the feasi -
bility and applicability of a GPT family model to reading passage gen -
eration. Given that recently more advanced models were released by 
OpenAI, future research should consider using ChatGPT or GPT-4 
(OpenAI, 2022). Even though we experimented with some prompt de -
signs in this research, it is quite limited to observe the full effect of 
different prompting techniques on age-adequate reading passage gen -
eration. Therefore, it would be worthwhile to explore more compre -
hensive prompt engineering approaches, including both manual 
techniques (e.g., Reynolds & McDonell, 2021) and automatic methods 
(e.g., Gao et al., 2020) within the context of the reading assessment 
passage generation. Lastly, the sample size in the empirical analysis of 
expert judgements was relatively small which may limit the generaliz -
ability of the results. 
6. Conclusion 
In conclusion, this research demonstrated that GPT family models 
could be effectively utilized for automated passage generation in the 
context of a large-scale reading assessment. The results revealed that 
carefully designed prompts with an adequate audience information 
GPT-3 can generate passages those align the difficulty level of human- 
authored passages. Further inspection also showed a high degree of 
similarity in terms of length, vocabulary, difficulty, adequacy, coher -
ence, and engagement between the two sets of passages. The findings of 
this study offer valuable insights for future practice, providing a prac -
tical roadmap for employing GPTx models to generate reading assess -
ment content. They also show that GPTx models could be effectively 
utilized for automated passage generation for large-scale reading as -
sessments. This could lead to significant cost savings and improvements 
in efficiency in the development of assessments. However, robust fact- 
checking mechanisms are essential to maintain the accuracy and reli -
ability of AI-generated content. 
Through our exploration of GPT-3 in the context of reading assess -
ment passage generation, we have contributed to a growing body of 
research on the applicability of large language models in educational 
settings. Our findings suggest that responsibly utilizing this technology 
can achieve more efficient, scalable, and comprehensive assessment 
practices that benefit educators, students, and education systems 
worldwide. 
Statements on open data and ethics 
In this study, the participant acted as contributing paid experts and 
their personal information was protected by ensuring their anonymity. 
They voluntarily contributed as raters of texts in the research and were 
made aware of their right to withdraw from taking the online survey at 
any time without consequence. No personal data was collected. The data 
collected for this study on the passage ratings can be provided upon 
request by sending an email to the corresponding author. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.  
List of Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Definition 
AIG Automated Item Generation 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
API Application Programming Interface 
BERT Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers 
CBA Computer-Based Assessments 
CBOW Continuous Bag-Of-Words 
ChatGPT Chat Generative Pretrained Transformer 
CNN Convolutional Neural Network 
DET Duolingo English Test 
DNN Deep Neural Network 
GPT Generative Pretrained Transformer 
GPT-2 Generative Pretrained Transformer 2 
GPT-3 Generative Pretrained Transformer 3 
GPT-3.5 Generative Pretrained Transformer 3.5 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 10 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
10
GPT-4 Generative Pretrained Transformer 4 
GPTx Generative Pretrained Transformer x (Referring to any version in the series of GPT models) 
GRU Gated Recurrent Unit 
HIT Human Intelligence Task 
IEA International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement 
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory 
LSTM-RNN Long Short-Term Memory-Based Recurrent Neural Networks 
MAD Median Absolute Deviation 
MCQs Multiple-Choice Questions 
MTurk Amazon Mechanical Turk 
NLP Natural Language Processing 
PIRLS Progress in International Reading Literacy Study 
QC Quality Control 
RNN Recurrent Neural Network 
T5 Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer 
TB Terabyte 
TIMSS Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study 
Appendix 
A. Example Prompts
Fig. 1A. Initial Prompt for Bees Passage.  
Fig. 2A. One-shot prompt for Bees Passage.   
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 11 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
11
Fig. 3A. Zero-shot prompt for Bees Passage.  
B. GPT Generated Passages 
Passage 1. Bees 
Bees are small, flying insects that are known for their role in pollination and for producing honey. They are found on every continent in the world 
except Antarctica. 
Bees ’ Bodies. Bees have adaptations that help them collect nectar and pollen from flowers. For example, they have a long tongue that unrolls to drink 
in nectar. They also have specialized hairs on their body that collect pollen. There are three sections to a bee ’ s body: the head, the thorax, and the 
abdomen. The head of a bee contains the eyes, antennae, and mouthparts. The thorax is the middle section where the wings and legs are. The abdomen 
is the bee ’ s back end and where the bee has the stinger. The female bees have a stinger that they use to defend themselves and their hive. 
Honey. Bees produce honey by collecting nectar from flowers. Nectar is a sugary liquid that is produced by flowers. Bees use their long tongue to 
collect the nectar and store it in their special honey stomach. Once the bee returns to the hive, the nectar is mixed with enzymes and turned into honey. 
The honey is then stored in the honeycomb. When the weather is cold and no flowers are blooming, the bees eat the honey to stay alive. 
Social Life. Bees are social insects that live in hives (or colonies). A bee colony is made up of three types of bees: the queen bee, the worker bee, and the 
drone bee. Each bee has a specific job to do in the colony. The queen is the biggest bee in the hive and the only bee that can lay eggs. She can lay 2000 
eggs a day in the spring or summer months. The workers are female bees, and they do all the work in the hive! They collect nectar, make honey, build 
the honeycomb, care for the eggs and young bees, and protect the hive. The drones are male bees, and their job is to mate with the queen. In the winter, 
the hive goes into survival mode, so the drones are kicked out 
Importance to Ecosystem. Bees are essential to the ecosystem because they help to pollinate plants. Pollination is the process of transferring pollen from 
the male part of the plant to the female part of the plant. This process is necessary for the plant to produce seeds. Bees are responsible for pollinating 
about one-third of the food we eat, including fruits, vegetables, and nuts. Bees are in danger because of the use of pesticides and the loss of habitat. You 
can help bees by planting flowers in your garden and avoiding the use of pesticides. 
Passage 2. The Amazons: Green Lungs of the Planet 
The Amazon: Green Lungs of the Planet. The Amazon is a large rainforest that takes up most of the Amazon Basin in South America. The basin is home to 
the Amazon River, the second longest river on Earth. The Amazon rainforest covers multiple countries and an area of nearly 6 million square kilo -
meters. This is almost half of the total rainforest area on Earth! The Amazon rainforest is an important part of the world ’ s climate because it helps to 
adjust the Earth ’ s temperature. It also plays a vital role in the global water cycle, producing much of Earth ’ s oxygen. 
The Weather in the Amazon. The climate in the Amazon rainforest is very warm and humid. It rains a lot in the Amazon. The average rainfall each year 
is 300 cm. This makes 200 rainy days in a year! There are only two seasons in the Amazon: the wet season and the dry season. The wet season is from 
October to May, and the dry season is from June to September. It is the wet season when the Amazon receives most of its rain 
The Plants and Animals in the Amazon. There are different kinds of plants and animals in the Amazon rainforest. Many plants and animals in the 
rainforest are not found anywhere else in the world. Some of the animals that live in the rainforest are monkeys, jaguars, sloths, snakes, and toucans. 
The Amazon rainforest is also home to many different types of plants, such as the rubber tree, the Brazil nut tree, and the cocoa tree. Some trees are as 
tall as 40 m, and you can use their leaves as an umbrella during a rainstorm! You have a letter from a team of researchers studying in the rainforest and 
can learn more about the Amazons by reading their letter. Dear Friend, The Amazon is the world ’ s largest rainforest. It is home to many different kinds 
of animals and plants. Unfortunately, Amazon is under threat. We are one of the research teams here in the Amazon that works on threats to the 
rainforest. We study deforestation, climate change, and fires in the Amazon. We try to find ways to help protect the Amazon and its animals. 
One of the biggest threats to the Amazon is deforestation. Deforestation is when trees are cut down, and the land is cleared for other uses, such as 
farming. Deforestation is a significant problem because it destroys the home of many animals and contributes to climate change. 
We are working hard to understand the long-term effects of deforestation on the climate. We are also working to develop ways to regenerate the 
forest. We invite you to learn more about our research and to help us spread the word about the importance of the rainforest. Thank you for your 
support, The Amazon Research Team 
Passage 3. Coco the Rabbit 
The shiny button eyes of the little rabbit stared up at the sky. The rabbit ’ s name was Coco, and she was very excited. She was going on her first 
adventure. She had never been outside her meadow before and was very curious about the world. Her friend, a little fox named Max, was going with 
her. Max had been to the forest many times, and he promised to show Coco around. Coco and Max hopped through the meadow, stopping to smell the 
flowers and chase the butterflies. They walked through the forest, stepping over roots and ducking under branches. They climbed over a fallen tree, 
and Max helped Coco down the other side. They walked and walked until they came to a clearing. In the clearing was a big, old house. It looked like it 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 12 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
12
had been abandoned for years. “ This is where the adventure starts, ” Max said. Coco ’ s heart started to beat faster. She was scared, but she was also 
excited. She wanted to see what was inside the house. 
Max and Coco crept up to the house. Max pushed open the door, and they both stepped inside. It was very dark and musty inside. They could see the 
dust floating in the air. Max and Coco coughed and covered their mouths with their paws. “ Let ’ s go explore, ” Max said. Coco followed Max as he 
showed her around the house. They went into different rooms and saw old furniture covered in dust. In one room, there was a big mirror. Max and 
Coco looked at themselves in the mirror. They both jumped when they saw a face appear in the mirror behind them. It was a scary face with big teeth. 
Max and Coco screamed and ran out of the room. They ran and ran until they were outside the house. They were both panting, and Coco ’ s heart was 
beating so fast she thought it would come out of her chest. “ That was so scary! ” she said. “ But who was that? ” “ I don ’ t know, ” Max said. “ But we ’ re 
never going back there to find out! ” “ Maybe we should go back, ” said Coco. “ No way, ” said Max. “ That place is haunted. ” Coco thought for a moment. 
She was a brave rabbit and wouldn ’ t be scared of a little ghost. “ I ’ m going back, ” she said. “ If you ’ re too scared, then you can wait here. ” Max didn ’ t 
want to be left alone, so he followed Coco back to the house. They went into the room with the mirror, and sure enough, the ghost was there again. But 
this time, Coco wasn ’ t scared. “ Who are you? ” she asked. “ I ’ m the ghost of the house, ” the ghost said. “ I ’ m here to protect this house. ” “ But why are you 
so scary? ” Coco asked. “ I ’ m not trying to be scary, ” the ghost said. “ I just want to make sure no one steals anything from this house. ” “ We ’ re not going 
to steal anything, ” Coco said. “ We ’ re just exploring. ” “ I ’ m sorry, ” the ghost said. “ I didn ’ t know that. You can explore all you want. Just be careful not 
to break anything. ” But Coco had an idea, and if he was the ghost of the house, maybe he could show them around. And so, he did. He showed them all 
the hidden passages and secret rooms. He even showed them where the treasure was hidden. “ This has been the best adventure ever! ” Coco said when 
they were finished. “ Thank you for showing us around. ” “ You ’ re welcome, ” the ghost said. “ And thank you for being kind. I ’ m not used to people being 
kind to me. ” "That ’ s what friends are for, ” Max said. “ That ’ s what we do for each other." 
They said goodbye to the ghost and left the house. Coco thought to herself; if you give a chance to get to know someone, even a ghost, you might 
find they ’ re not so different from you after all. 
References 
Adams, D. (1995). The Hitch Hiker ’ s Guide to the Galaxy omnibus . Random House .  
Attali, Y., Runge, A., LaFlair, G. T., Yancey, K., Goodwin, S., Park, Y., & Von Davier, A. A. 
(2022). The interactive reading task: Transformer-based automatic item generation. 
Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 5 . 
Azevedo, P., Leite, B., Cardoso, H. L., Silva, D. C., & Reis, L. P. (2020). Exploring nlp and 
information extraction to jointly address question generation and answering. 
Artificial Intelligence Applications and Innovations: 16th IFIP WG 12.5 International 
Conference, AIAI 2020, Neos Marmaras, Greece, June 5 – 7, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, 
16 , 396 – 407. Springer International Publishing . 
Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., … Amodei, D. 
(2020). Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems, 33 , 1877 – 1901 . 
Burstein, J., LaFlair, G. T., Kunnan, A. J., & von Davier, A. A. (2021). A theoretical 
assessment ecosystem for a digital-first assessment — the Duolingo English Test . DRR-21- 
04 . 
Cathoven. (2023). Text difficulty analyzer . Retrieved from https://www.cathoven.com/ 
en/freetext-difficulty-analyzer/ . 
Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Pinto, H. P. D. O., Kaplan, J., … Zaremba, W. 
(2021). Evaluating large language models trained on code . arXiv preprint arXiv: 
2107.03374 . 
Cho, K., Van Merri ¨enboer, B., Bahdanau, D., & Bengio, Y. (2014). On the properties of 
neural machine translation: Encoder-decoder approaches . arXiv preprint arXiv: 
1409.1259 . 
von Davier, M. (2018). Automated item generation with recurrent neural networks. 
Psychometrika, 83 (4), 847 – 857 . 
von Davier, M. (2019). Training Optimus prime, MD: Generating medical certification items 
by fine-tuning OpenAI ’ s gpt2 transformer model . arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08594 . 
von Davier, M., & Bezirhan, U. (2022). A robust method for detecting item Misfit in large 
scale assessments. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 0 (0). https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/00131644221105819 
Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep 
bidirectional transformers for language understanding . arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 . 
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science, 14 (2), 179 – 211 . 
Embretson, S. E., & Yang, X. (2007). Automatic item generation and cognitive 
psychology. In C. R. Rao, & S. Sinharay (Eds.), Handbook of statistics. Psychometrics 
(Vol. 26, pp. 747 – 768). North Holland: Elsevier .  
Flor, M., & Riordan, B. (2018). June). A semantic role-based approach to open-domain 
automatic question generation. In Proceedings of the thirteenth workshop on innovative 
use of NLP for building educational applications (pp. 254 – 263) . 
Fung, Y. C., Kwok, J. C. W., Lee, L. K., Chui, K. T., & U, L. H. (2020). Automatic question 
generation system for English reading comprehension. In Technology in education. 
Innovations for online teaching and learning: 5th international conference, ICTE 2020, 
Macau, China (pp. 136 – 146). Springer Singapore. August 19-22, 2020, Revised 
Selected Papers 5 . 
Gao, T., Fisch, A., & Chen, D. (2020). Making pre-trained language models better few-shot 
learners . arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15723 . 
Gierl, M. J., & Haladyna, T. M. (2012). Automatic item generation: Theory and practice . 
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203803912 
Gierl, M. J., & Lai, H. (2013). Using automated processes to generate test items. 
Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 32 , 3650 . 
Gierl, M. J., Lai, H., & Matovinovic, D. (2020). Augmented intelligence and the future of 
item development. Application of Artificial Intelligence to Assessment, 1 . 
Gierl, M. J., Lai, H., & Turner, S. R. (2012). Using automatic item generation to create 
multiple choice test items. Medical Education, 46 (8), 757 – 765 . 
Gwern. (2023). GPT-3 creative fiction & nonfiction writing . https://www.gwern.net/ 
GPT-3 . 
Haladyna, T. M., & Rodriguez, M. C. (2013). Developing and validating test items . 
Hansen, H., & Hebart, M. N. (2022). Semantic features of object concepts generated with GPT 
3 . arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03753 . 
Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 
9 (8), 1735 – 1780 . 
Hocky, G. M., & White, A. D. (2022). Natural language processing models that automate 
programming will transform chemistry research and teaching. Digital Discovery, 1 (2), 
79 83 . 
Hommel, B. E., Wollang, F. J. M., Kotova, V., Zacher, H., & Schmukle, S. C. (2022). 
Transformer-based deep neural language modeling for construct-specific automatic 
item generation. Psychometrika, 87 (2), 749 – 772 . 
Hornke, L. F., & Habon, M. W. (1986). Rule-based item bank construction and evaluation 
within the linear logistic framework. Applied Psychological Measurement, 10 , 
369 – 380 . 
Jozefowicz, R., Zaremba, W., & Sutskever, I. (2015). June). An empirical exploration of 
recurrent network architectures. In International conference on machine learning (pp. 
2342 – 2350). PMLR .  
Kalchbrenner, N., Grefenstette, E., & Blunsom, P. (2014). A convolutional neural network 
for modelling sentences . arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.2188 . 
Kosh, A. E., Simpson, M. A., Bickel, L., Kellogg, M., & Sanford-Moore, E. (2019). A cost 
benefit analysis of automatic item generation. Educational Measurement: Issues and 
Practice, 38 (1), 48 – 53 . 
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2017). Imagenet classification with deep 
convolutional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60 (6), 84 – 90 . 
LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., & Haffner, P. (1998). Gradient-based learning applied 
to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86 (11), 2278 – 2324 . 
Leys, C., Ley, C., Klein, O., Bernard, P., & Licata, L. (2013). Detecting outliers: Do not use 
standard deviation around the mean, use absolute deviation around the median. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49 , 764 – 766. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jesp.2013.03.013 
Mazidi, K. (2017). Automatic question generation from passages. In International 
conference on computational linguistics and intelligent text processing (pp. 655 – 665). 
Cham: Springer .  
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Efficient estimation of word 
representations in vector space . arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 . 
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., & Dean, J. (2013). Distributed 
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems, 26 . 
Mizumoto, A., & Eguchi, M. (2023). Exploring the potential of using an Ai language model 
for automated essay scoring . Available at SSRN 4373111 . 
Moore, S., Nguyen, H. A., Bier, N., Domadia, T., & Stamper, J. (2022). Assessing the 
quality of student-generated short answer questions using GPT-3. In Educating for a 
new future: Making Sense of technology-enhanced learning adoption: 17
th 
European 
Conference on technology enhanced learning, EC-TEL 2022, toulouse, France, September 
12 – 16, 2022, proceedings (pp. 243 – 257). Cham: Springer International Publishing .  
Mullis, I. V., & Martin, M. O. (2019). PIRLS 2021 assessment frameworks. International 
association for the evaluation of educational achievement. Herengracht, 487 . 
Amsterdam, 1017 BT, The Netherlands . 
Narayan, S., Simoes, G., Ma, J., Craighead, H., & Mcdonald, R. (2020). QURIOUS: 
Question generation pretraining for text generation . arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11026 . 
Noy, S., & Zhang, W. (2023). Experimental evidence on the productivity effects of generative 
artificial intelligence . Available at SSRN 4375283 . 
OpenAI. (2022). Model index for researchers . Retrieved from https://platform.openai. 
com/docs/model-index-for-researchers . 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              

===== PAGE 13 =====

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
13
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C. L., Mishkin, P., … Lowe, R. 
(2022). Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback . arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2203.02155 . 
Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. D. (2014). Glove: Global vectors for word 
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural 
language processing (EMNLP) (pp. 1532 – 1543) . 
Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., & Sutskever, I. (2019). Language 
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 1 (8), 9 . 
Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang, S., Matena, M., … Liu, P. J. (2020). 
Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. The 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21 (1), 5485 – 5551 . 
Raina, V., & Gales, M. (2022). Multiple-choice question generation: Towards an automated 
assessment framework . arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.11830 . 
Razavian Sharif, A., Azizpour, H., Sullivan, J., & Carlsson, S. (2014). CNN features off-the 
shelf: An astounding baseline for recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on 
computer vision and pattern recognition workshops (pp. 806 – 813) . 
Reynolds, L., & McDonell, K. (2021). Prompt programming for large language models: 
Beyond the few-shot paradigm. In Extended abstracts of the 2021 CHI conference on 
human factors in computing systems (pp. 1 – 7) . 
van Rossum, G., & Drake, F. L. (1995). Python reference manual . Amsterdam: Centrum 
voor Wiskunde en Informatica .  
Ruder, S. (2018). A review of the neural history of Natural Language processing . http://ruder 
.io/a-review-of-the-recent-history-of-nlp/ , 2018. 
Settles, B., LaFlair, G, T., & Hagiwara, M. (2020). Machine learning – driven language 
assessment. Transactions of the Association for computational Linguistics, 8 , 247 – 263 . 
Shakeri, H., Neustaedter, C., & DiPaola, S. (2021). Saga: Collaborative storytelling with 
gpt-3. In Companion publication of the 2021 conference on computer supported 
cooperative work and social computing (pp. 163 – 166) . 
Shin, E. (2021). Automated item generation by combining the non-template and template 
based approaches to generate reading inference test items . 
Shneiderman, B. (2020). Human-centered artificial intelligence: Reliable, safe & 
trustworthy. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 36 (6), 495 – 504 . 
Sison, A. J. G., Daza, M. T., Gozalo-Brizuela, R., & Garrido-Merch ´an, E. C. (2023). 
ChatGPT: More than a weapon of mass deception, ethical challenges and responses from 
the human-centered artificial intelligence (HCAI) perspective . arXiv preprint arXiv: 
2304.11215 . 
Stenner, A. J. (2022). Measuring reading comprehension with the Lexile framework. In 
Explanatory models, unit standards, and personalized learning in educational 
measurement: Selected papers by A. Jackson Stenner (pp. 63 – 88). Singapore: Springer 
Nature Singapore.TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center (2017). PIRLS 2016 
international results in reading. Retrieved from https://timssandpirls.bc.edu/pirl 
s2016/index.html . 
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., … 
Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems, 30 . 
Walsh, J. (2022). Lesson plan generation using natural language processing: Prompting 
best practices with openai ’ s gpt-3 model. AERA, 2022 , 2022 . 
Wang, Z., Valdez, J., Basu Mallick, D., & Baraniuk, R. G. (2022). Towards human-like 
educational question generation with large language models. In Artificial intelligence 
in education: 23rd international conference, AIED 2022 (pp. 153 – 166). Cham: Springer 
International Publishing. Durham, UK, July 27 – 31, 2022, Proceedings, Part I . 
Wu, X., He, X., Li, T., Liu, N., & Zhai, X. (2023). Matching exemplar as next sentence\ 
prediction (MeNSP): Zero-shot prompt learning for automatic scoring in science education . 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08771 . 
Yin, W., Kann, K., Yu, M., & Schütze, H. (2017). Comparative study of CNN and RNN for 
natural language processing . arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.01923 . 
Young, T., Hazarika, D., Poria, S., & Cambria, E. (2018). Recent trends in deep learning 
based natural language processing. Ieee Computational intelligenCe Magazine, 13 (3), 
55 – 75 . 
Zong, M., & Krishnamachari, B. (2022). Solving math word problems concerning systems 
of equations with gpt-3. In Proceedings of the thirteenth AAAI symposium on educational 
advances in artificial intelligence . 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier                                                                                                                                                                                                              