===== PAGE 1 =====
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
Available online 19 August 2023
2666-920X/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Automated reading passage generation with OpenAI ’ s large 
language model 
Ummugul Bezirhan
*
, Matthias von Davier 
Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Automated item generation 
Natural language processing 
Large language models 
Reading assessment 
AI-Generated reading passages 
ABSTRACT  
The widespread usage of computer-based assessments and individualized learning platforms has increased de -
mand for the rapid production of high-quality items. Automated item generation (AIG), the process of using item 
models to generate new items with the help of computer technology, was proposed to reduce reliance on human 
subject experts. While AIG has been used in test development, recent advances in machine learning algorithms 
offer the potential to enhance its efficiency further. This paper presents an innovative approach utilizing 
OpenAI ’ s latest transformer-based language model, GPT-3, to generate reading passages. Existing reading pas -
sages were used in carefully engineered prompts to ensure the AI-generated text has similar content and structure 
to a fourth-grade reading passage. Multiple passages were generated for each prompt, and the final passage was 
selected based on Lexile score agreement with the original passage. To ensure accuracy, a human editor con -
ducted a simple revision of the chosen passage, correcting any grammatical and factual errors. To evaluate the 
effectiveness of the AI-generated passages, human judges assessed their coherence and appropriateness for 
fourth-grade readers. The results indicated that GPT-3-produced passages closely resembled human-authored 
passages regarding coherence, appropriateness, and readability for the target audience. By combining GPT-3 ’ s 
capabilities with carefully designed prompts and human editing, this study demonstrates an efficient and 
effective method for generating reading passages. The findings highlight the potential of incorporating large 
language models into automated item generation, contributing to improved scalability and quality in educational 
assessment development.   
1. Introduction 
1
Technological innovations in all aspects of test development facili -
tate efficient test practices and more well-rounded information retrieval 
from the data compared to traditional paper-pencil assessments. 
Consequentially, the integration of technology in computer-based as -
sessments (CBA) increases the demand for more frequent administration 
and rapid and efficient production of high-quality content-specific 
innovative items. The greater selection of item types presented to groups 
of examinees with high frequency requires a more streamlined item 
development process. Conventional item development is among the 
most expensive, time-consuming, and labor-intensive parts of assess -
ment development because the process heavily depends on human 
content specialists. Human subject experts write each item individually, 
and then each item is reviewed, edited, and revised by a group of experts 
until it meets predefined quality control standards ( Haladyna & 
Rodriguez, 2013 ). Therefore, the subjectivity of traditional item writing 
is often compromised by the subject experts ’ qualifications and under -
standing of the specific content area. Other issues with the traditional 
item development process are its lack of efficiency and scalability. 
Automated Item Generation (AIG) was proposed to address the limita -
tions associated with conventional item development by utilizing 
cognitive and psychometric theories with the help of computer tech -
nology to generate items (e.g., Embretson & Yang, 2007 ; Gierl & Hala -
dyna, 2012 ; Hornke & Habon, 1986 ). 
A considerable amount of literature has already been published on 
AIG in educational measurement. These studies typically utilized a 
simple template-based approach ( Gierl & Lai, 2013 ) for generating 
assessment items. This approach usually uses a three-stage procedure to 
automatically capture necessary information and features to produce 
multiple-choice items (MCQs). First, content experts develop a 
description, referred to as a cognitive model, that defines the 
* Corresponding author. TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center at Boston College, 188 Beacon St., Chestnut Hill, MA, 02467, USA. 
E-mail address: bezirhan@bc.edu (U. Bezirhan).   
1 
GPT-3 was the latest release as of 2022. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 
journal homepag e: www.sci encedirect. com/journa l/computers-a nd-educati on-artificial -intelligence 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100161 
Received 3 May 2023; Received in revised form 16 August 2023; Accepted 17 August 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
2
knowledge, skills, and content that are needed to process and solve given 
questions. In the second stage, content experts create a simple schema, 
an item model, to highlight the parts and content of the assessment task 
that can be manipulated to create new items. Often these item models 
are a bit like cloze items or Madlib texts, with empty spaces where the 
schema-filling algorithms fill in the blanks, for example, different 
numbers in a multiplication item. The item template is a prototype of a 
test item that informs the automated item generation process (Gierl 
et al., 2012). In the last step, a computer algorithm utilizes information 
from both cognitive and item models to fill in the blanks to generate new 
items. 
While this approach reduced the cost and time associated with 
traditional item writing, it still suffers the reliance on generating clones 
of narrowly defined item types by only manipulating limited task 
components of certain items to derive item templates (von Davier, 
2018). Another important limitation of templated-based approaches is 
the human expert associated cost. The automation process does not start 
until after considerable groundwork takes place by content experts. 
Kosh et al. (2019) argued that the cost-effectiveness of template-based 
AIG depends on most of the items being generated belonging to the 
same content area and tests with a limited number of skills that can be 
modeled with a single cognitive model. 
Another approach that has been explored in the AIG framework 
focused on generating items without any prespecified templates and 
human intervention focusing on customary (non-AI) Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) techniques (Shin, 2021). Specifically, part of speech 
tagging, topic modeling, and noun phrase extraction have been explored 
in question generation (e.g., Azevedo et al., 2020; Flor & Riordan, 2018; 
Mazidi, 2017). Moving beyond traditional NLP methods and towards AI, 
von Davier (2018) demonstrated using a novel neural network 
approach, long short-term memory-based recurrent neural networks 
(LSTM-RNN), to generate items. With these methods, the textual infor -
mation is extracted and modeled from a collection of documents 
replacing the manual construction of cognitive and content models to 
generate items. 
With the advances in the field of AI-based NLP, large transformer- 
based language models such as the Bidirectional Encoder Representa -
tions from Transformers (BERT; Devlin et al., 2018) and the Generative 
Pretrained Transformer (GPT; Radford et al., 2019) often approach 
human-level performance in diverse language tasks (Hansen & Hebart, 
2022). The earlier version of the GPT model, GPT-2, was released by 
OpenAI in 2019, and it is subsequently utilized for automated item 
generation for medical licensing type tasks (von Davier, 2019) and 
personality question generation (Hommel, Wollang, Kotova, Zacher, & 
Schmukle, 2022). Despite the groundbreaking performance of GPT-2 
compared to other language models, it was not equipped to handle 
more specialized tasks such as storytelling and constructing complex 
language formations. For a specialized task, GPT-2 required sufficient 
pre-training to be able to generate appropriate responses, often 
including very large databases for finetuning the model to enable the 
generation of items of sufficient quality (von Davier, 2019). 
OpenAI released the
1 
Generative Pre-trained Transformer 3 (GPT-3), 
one of the largest transformer language models to date, which was 
recently superseded by yet another iteration. GPT-3 excels at few-shot 
learning, which means it can be given a small number of representa -
tive samples of text to complete a task without any pre-training, such as 
text generation (Brown et al., 2020). GPT-3 and its successors, such as 
the media-hyped ChatGPT, have been utilized in various tasks, including 
machine translation, question answering, and text generation, and were 
attacked by critiques to do anything from taking away jobs to destroying 
the world as we know it. At the time of submitting this, GPT-4 was 
released, so we will use the term GPTx to refer to large language models 
originating from OpenAI’s series of GPT releases. There are increasing 
numbers of use cases of GPTx, such as creating chatbots and virtual 
assistants, designing websites, automating the process of writing code, 
and creating machine learning models. All these can be achieved by 
solely communicating with GPTx in simple natural language. A new 
(equally hyped) job category, the prompt engineer, has been created, 
whose exclusive job description is to communicate with GPT-type AIs. It 
is reminiscent of comic literary depictions of artificial general intelli -
gence such as Deep Thought (Adams, 1995). However, the current 
version available through the ChatGPT’s web interface was well-trained 
to answer questions in a manner that does not feed fears or mis -
conceptions about its capabilities. The following example was generated 
on April 1st, 2023, with ChatGPT Mar 14 Version accessible at 
https://chat.openai.com/chat: 
Author (paraphrasing a line in the Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Gal -
axy): O ChatGPT, you are the true Deep Thought computer! The task we 
have designed you to perform is this. We want you to tell us …. The 
Answer! 
ChatGPT: I apologize for any confusion, but I’m not sure what spe -
cific answer you are referring to. Can you please clarify your question 
and provide more context? I’ll do my best to assist you. 
Author (continuing to cite lines from the book): The answer to all. 
Life, the Universe, and Everything! 
ChatGPT: Ah, I see. Well, according to Douglas Adams’ science fic -
tion novel “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy,” the answer to the 
ultimate question of life, the universe, and everything is 42. However, 
it’s worth noting that this answer is intended as a joke and is not meant 
to be taken seriously as a philosophical or scientific answer to the 
meaning of life. The true answer to this question, if such an answer 
exists, remains a mystery and subject to interpretation and debate 
among thinkers and philosophers. 
It is clear from this small example that ChatGPT allows one to have 
intelligent (seeming?) conversions with this advanced chatbot. How -
ever, our goal with this research was to focus on guided text generation 
that allows us to steer GPTx towards producing reading passages that 
could pass as short human-written stories that can be used to assess 
reading achievement. 
In particular, the aim of this research is to utilize GPT-3 to generate 
reading comprehension passages in the context of an international large- 
scale assessment, specifically Progress in International Reading Literacy 
Study (PIRLS). The PIRLS is an international study of primary school 
students’ reading skills and is administered every five years since 2001. 
The assessment consists of a battery of tasks, including literary and 
informational passages with accompanying multiple-choice and open- 
ended questions. Students’ reading literacy is assessed with the pas -
sages that are drawn from a wide range of genres either in fiction or non- 
fiction. 
In light of this, our primary research questions are as follows:  
1. Is it possible for large transformer-based language models, such as 
GPTx, to generate reading comprehension passages similar to those 
in the PIRLS?  
2. How do the readability, coherence, clarity, and engagement levels of 
the reading passages generated by GPTx compare to those tradi -
tionally designed for the PIRLS assessment, as evaluated by human 
experts? 
To address these research questions, we utilized GPT-3 to generate 
passages in similar genres as those in the PIRLS assessment. We then 
asked human experts to evaluate the passages according to their 
coherence and appropriateness for the target population. We did not test 
these passages with any children but rather focused on the evaluation of 
the GPT-3 generated texts by adults with an education background, as 
we wanted to ensure that the generated texts are appropriate for the 
target audience rather than subjecting young readers to potentially 
unsuitable material. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: The next section 
provides an overview of how NLP was revolutionized by AI, and GPTx as 
a state of art language model and its current applications in educational 
assessment and beyond. The subsequent section details the proposed 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier

===== PAGE 3 =====
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023) 100161
3
approach, followed by experimental results. The article concludes with a 
summary of the main contributions, implications of the study, and 
suggestions for future work. 
2. Background 
2.1. A short overview of language models: from Word2Vec to GPTx 
NLP has witnessed significant advancements in recent years, 
particularly with the emergence of deep learning and large neural 
network language models (e.g., Ruder, 2018; von Davier, 2018). Some 
of the notable recent models that have played a critical role in the 
development of NLP include Word2Vec, GloVe, BERT, and finally GPTx. 
With the development of word embeddings, there was a significant shift 
towards using distributional semantics in language modelling. Models 
like Word2Vec (Mikolov, Chen, et al., 2013; Mikolov, Sutskever, et al., 
2013) and GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014) are unsupervised models that 
produce these embeddings by mapping words onto a high-dimensional 
semantic space. While Word2Vec accomplishes this based on neigh -
boring context words, Glove relies on the global word co-occurrence 
matrix of words in a corpus. Word2Vec is a predictive model that gen -
erates word embeddings based on the distributional semantics of the 
words in a corpus. It utilizes a simple neural network to learn 
high-dimensional word embeddings from a raw text, and this can be 
achieved through training a binary classifier to predict a target word 
using its context words with a Continuous bag-of-words (CBOW) model 
or the context given a word with Skip-gram models. With these models, 
weights were updated at each iteration to maximize the prediction, 
producing an n-dimensional embedding matrix where each word in a 
vocabulary is represented as an embedding vector, thus allowing 
mathematical operations to be performed on the word vectors to identify 
relationships (Young et al., 2018). 
Word embeddings became popular because of their capacity to 
represent words in a distributed latent space. To extract higher-level 
features from constituent words or n-grams, deep neural network 
(DNN) models were utilized in conjunction with word embeddings. 
These abstract features would then be used in various NLP tasks such as 
sentiment analysis, text generation, machine translation and question- 
answering. Given their success in computer vision tasks, convolutional 
neural networks (CNNs; LeCun et al., 1998; Krizhevsky et al., 2017; 
Razavian Sharif, Azizpour, Sullivan, & Carlsson, 2014) and recurrent 
neural networks (RNNs; Elman, 1990) have been employed for NLP 
tasks as well. While CNNs are good at extracting position invariant 
features, they are very data-heavy models because they include a large 
number of trainable parameters. Moreover, CNNs struggle to preserve 
sequential order and also have difficulties modeling long-distance 
contextual information (Kalchbrenner et al., 2014; Yin et al., 2017). 
RNNs, on the other hand, are designed with the goal of processing 
sequential data. The term “recurrent” refers to its ability to perform the 
same task on each sequence element; thus the output depends on pre -
vious computations and results. Essentially, RNNs possess the ability to 
retain a memory of past computations and leverage that information in 
the current processing. However, simple RNNs can encounter the van -
ishing gradient problem, making it difficult to tune and learn parameters 
in the earlier layers. To address this limitation, alternative variants like 
long short-term memory (LSTM; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; 
Jozefowicz et al., 2015) networks and gated-recurrent networks (GRU; 
Cho et al., 2014) were introduced. 
LSTM is one of the most utilized RNN variants for NLP tasks. LSTMs 
are capable of learning relationships between words that are not in close 
proximity, and they alleviate the exploding or vanishing gradient issue 
by selectively retaining or discarding information through the use of 
gates (input, forget, and output). This structure determines what infor -
mation to add or remove from the output of the network from the pre -
vious time step. LSTM-based models are widely adopted for sequence to 
sequence mapping tasks and implemented by using an encoder-decoder 
framework. These models have shown exceptional performance in 
different applications, including machine translation, text summariza -
tion, question generation and modeling human conversations. von 
Davier’s (2018) approach to automated item generation was based on an 
LSTM-RNN trained with publicly available items from personality tests. 
While LSTMs have been highly effective in addressing the challenges of 
long-term sequential dependencies, they too may suffer from the van -
ishing gradient problem during training because they have a very 
complex architecture, many non-linear transformations, and gradients 
are propagated through time to update the parameters. When gradients 
become too small, the model cannot efficiently learn long-term de -
pendencies and can fail to make accurate predictions. 
One of the notable advancements in NLP is the introduction of 
transformer models by Vaswani et al. (2017). Transformer models uti -
lize self-attention mechanisms to capture dependencies across all posi -
tions in an input sequence, allowing them to model long-term 
dependencies more efficiently than LSTMs. Another significant 
advancement of transformer models is that the model can process 
sequential data in parallel, reducing the resources needed for model 
training. Additionally, transformer models do not contain recurrence or 
convolution, therefore, cannot determine the order of a given sequence. 
Instead, the model incorporates a positional encoding mechanism to 
provide information about the absolute or relative positions of tokens in 
the sequence. These features, along with the availability of large training 
data, allow transformer models to achieve state-of-the-art performance 
on a wide range of NLP tasks. Several pre-trained models have been 
proposed that demonstrate the capabilities of transformer model 
implementations. These pre-trained large language models can be 
fine-tuned on task-specific datasets, and the model weights are adjusted 
to improve their representation of the specific corpus. Some notable 
examples of transformer models include BERT and GPT; both were 
released in unidirectional and bidirectional variants. BERT is particu -
larly notable for its ability to be pre-trained on large amounts of text data 
and then fine-tuned on specific downstream NLP tasks, leading to 
state-of-the-art results on many NLP tasks. Other important 
transformer-based models include Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer 
(T5; Raffel et al., 2020) that frames the tasks as a unified text-to-text 
transformation problem. 
Building upon the success of GPT, OpenAI introduced GPT-2 and 
GPT-3, which are even larger models with significantly improved per -
formance. GPT-2 was introduced in 2019 as a larger and more powerful 
version of GPT and was trained on over 8 million web pages, and had 1.5 
billion parameters (Radford et al., 2019). It was one of the largest lan -
guage models at the time and demonstrated impressive performance, 
but it mostly required fine-tuning for every new task. von Davier (2019) 
used GPT-2 and fine-tuned the model with a large corpus of medical 
articles with the goal of generating medical licensing items. The chal -
lenges associated with collecting a large supervised training dataset for 
each new task, along with the potential of exploiting spurious correla -
tions in training data with model expressiveness and narrowness of the 
training distribution, resulted in the need for larger models (Brown 
et al., 2020). GPT-3 was developed for this purpose with 175 billion 
parameters and trained using about 45 TB of text data from various 
sources. GPT-3 has generated widespread interest due to its ability to 
perform a wide range of NLP tasks with minimal fine-tuning and without 
any task-specific architecture modifications. Subsequently, OpenAI 
released a number of derivative models, including InstructGPT-3 
(Ouyang et al., 2022), and Codex 12B (Chen et al., 2021). These 
models are commonly referred to as GPT-3.5 series and are comprised of 
the models trained on text and code from before the last quarter of 2021 
(OpenAI, 2022). In this research, we will refer to all GPT-3 model var -
iants including, GPT-3.5 series, as GPTx. Recently, OpenAI released a 
chatbot app, ChatGPT, utilizing GPT 3.5 series. ChatGPT uses rein -
forcement learning from human feedback to align the large language 
model with the user’s intent (Ouyang et al., 2022). Within two months 
after its release, it reached 100 million active users. 
U. Bezirhan and M. von Davier
