===== PAGE 1 =====
Automated Educational Question Generation at
Different Bloom’s Skill Levels using Large
Language Models: Strategies and Evaluation
Nicy Scaria1 , Suma Dharani Chenna1,2 , Deepak Subramani1
1 Computational and Data Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, India
2 School of Computer Science and Engineering, VIT-AP University, India
{nicyscaria,deepakns}@iisc.ac.in, sumadharanichenna@gmail.com
Abstract. Developing questions that are pedagogically sound, relevant,
and promote learning is a challenging and time-consuming task for edu-
cators. Modern-day large language models (LLMs) generate high-quality
content across multiple domains, potentially helping educators to de-
velophigh-qualityquestions.Automatededucationalquestiongeneration
(AEQG) is important in scaling online education catering to a diverse
student population. Past attempts at AEQG have shown limited abil-
ities to generate questions at higher cognitive levels. In this study, we
examine the ability of five state-of-the-art LLMs of different sizes to gen-
erate diverse and high-quality questions of different cognitive levels, as
defined by Bloom’s taxonomy. We use advanced prompting techniques
with varying complexity for AEQG. We conducted expert and LLM-
based evaluations to assess the linguistic and pedagogical relevance and
qualityofthequestions.OurfindingssuggestthatLLMscangeneraterel-
evant and high-quality educational questions of different cognitive levels
when prompted with adequate information, although there is a signifi-
cant variance in the performance of the five LLMs considered. We also
show that automated evaluation is not on par with human evaluation.
Keywords: Large Language Models· Automated Educational Question
Generation · Bloom’s Taxonomy.
1 Introduction
Transformer-based pre-trained large language models developed in recent years
havedrasticallyimprovedthequalityofnaturallanguagegeneration(NLG)tasks
[24]. With an exponential increase in training data and model size, these models
can generate complex text with human expert-level quality. The release of Ope-
nAI’s ChatGPT made LLMs accessible to a wider audience who are not experts
in natural language processing (NLP), allowing them to use them for their daily
tasks. The language models are tuned to follow the user instructions through
instruction-tuning [24]. They have zero-shot capabilities [10], which means that
This is a preprint. The Version of Record of this contribution is published in In-
ternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education (LNAI,volume 14830),
and is available online at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-64299-9_12
arXiv:2408.04394v1  [cs.CL]  8 Aug 2024

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 N. Scaria et al.
if you prompt the LLM with detailed task descriptions, the model will create
meaningful outputs. These LLMs have the potential to be used in different ways
in education [9], including the creation of personalized content, assessments, and
feedback.
High-quality assessments enable learners to deeply engage with the subject
and relate their learning to the real world. Assessments that focus on different
cognitive skills as defined in Bloom’s taxonomy levels [2] (described in Table 1)
help educators identify the gaps in student learning. This information allows
them to adapt their teaching to better support students and also helps students
understand their strengths and weaknesses. However, creating such assessments
requires significant time and effort from educators [11]. Automated Educational
Question Generation (AEQG) systems reduce the effort and cognitive load on
teachers. Past research on AEQG methods required context information for the
models to generate high-quality questions. Educational information is available
from multiple sources today and choosing the right resource is challenging.
Related Work: In the pre-LLM era, AQG research focused mainly on gen-
erating questions using question-answer datasets such as SQuAD 2.0, and NQ.
These data sets contained a context and an answer for which the question had
to be created [25]. However, the limited availability of public datasets impeded
the progress of AQG systems capable of producing good quality questions. Re-
cent research in question generation is focused on using pretrained or fine-tuned
LLMs for the process. Encoder decoder models, such as the Text-To-Text Trans-
fer Transformer (T5) and decoder-only models such as GPT3, along with context
information, were used to generate questions [17]. Pre-training these models with
educational text also improved the quality of the questions generated [3].
Recent research has shown promising results in evaluating the quality of
machine-generated content using LLMs using Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompt-
ing on different evaluation criteria. G-EVAL [13], an evaluator model based
on GPT4, significantly outperformed previous models and aligned with human
judgments on summarization tasks. However, the results of some studies that
used fine-tuned GPT3 models to evaluate the pedagogical quality of machine-
generated questions were unsatisfactory [16,3]. Human expert or crowd evalua-
tions have been extensively used to analyze the pedagogical quality of machine-
generated questions [19,6].
The questions generated by most AQG models generally test lower-order
skills [20] or create questions that have answers directly mentioned in the text
[25]. These questions are not enough to test the higher-order cognitive skills
of students. Bloom’s taxonomy [2] serves as a guide for educators to generate
questions to test different cognitive skills. Recent work [18] has used GPT4 to
develop course material based on Bloom’s taxonomy.
1.1 Objective and Research Questions
Our approach utilizes the knowledge of the content inherently present in LLMs
along with the addition of technical information on the question generation pro-
cess in the prompt to generate educational questions. Although LLMs excel in

===== PAGE 3 =====
AEQG at Different Bloom’s Skill Levels using LLMs 3
Table 1.Revised Bloom’s taxonomy [2] in ascending order in the cognitive dimension
Bloom’s level Description
Remember Retrieve relevant knowledge from long-term memory.
Understand Construct meaning from instructional messages, including oral, writ-
ten, and graphic communication.
Apply Carry out or use a procedure in a given situation.
Analyze Break material into foundational parts and determine how parts relate
to one another and the overall structure or purpose
Evaluate Make judgments based on criteria and standards.
Create Put elements together to form a coherent whole; reorganize into a new
pattern or structure.
various downstream tasks, they produce errors and inconsistencies [8], which can
compromise the quality of the questions generated. This also varies significantly
between different LLMs. Therefore, evaluating the quality of the questions gen-
erated by LLMs is essential. While metrics such as the BLEU score or perplexity
can assess machine-generated questions, they typically only examine linguistic
characteristics [22]. In the present work, we perform a manual expert evalua-
tion using the services of two educators in the AEQG topic’s domain and an
automated LLM evaluation using an LLM that is not employed for AEQG.
We used zero-shot and few-shot techniques and CoT prompting to generate
questions for a graduate-level data science course using LLMs of different sizes.
Five different prompt strategies of varying complexity were used to create these
questions. Then, we performed a manual expert evaluation using the services of
two educators in the AEQG topic’s domain and an automated LLM evaluation
using an LLM that is not employed for AEQG. The evaluation was performed on
a nine-item rubric to assess their linguistic and pedagogical quality [7] by experts
and the LLM. The LLM evaluation is performed as a zero-shot classification task
through a specially designed prompt.
Specifically, we investigated answers to the following research questions.
RQ1: Can instruction fine-tuned modern LLMs create high-quality and diverse
educational questions at different cognitive levels based on Bloom’s taxonomy?
RQ2: Does the size of the LLM significantly impact the model’s performance in
educational question generation?
RQ3: How does the amount of information provided in the prompt affect the
quality of the questions generated?
RQ4: Can LLMs create questions that are relatable to a specific population or
context?
RQ5:Caninstructionfine-tunedLLMsevaluategeneratededucationalquestions
effectively, similar to human evaluators, when given the same instructions?
In what follows, we first discuss the methodology. Then, we present and
analyze the results before concluding with directions for future research.
