===== PAGE 1 =====
Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 13291–13309
December 6-10, 2023 ©2023 Association for Computational Linguistics
BLESS: Benchmarking Large Language Models on Sentence Simplification
Tannon Kew1,†, Alison Chi2,†, Laura Vásquez-Rodríguez3,4,†,∗,
Sweta Agrawal5, Dennis Aumiller6, Fernando Alva-Manchego7, Matthew Shardlow8
1University of Zurich, Switzerland 2National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
3Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland 4University of Manchester, UK
5University of Maryland, US 6Cohere, US 7Cardiff University, UK
8Manchester Metropolitan University, UK
kew@cl.uzh.ch, achi@gapp.nthu.edu.tw, laura.vasquez@idiap.ch
sweagraw@umd.edu, dennisaumiller@cohere.com
alvamanchegof@cardiff.ac.uk, m.shardlow@mmu.ac.uk
Abstract
We present BLESS, a comprehensive perfor-
mance benchmark of the most recent state-of-
the-art large language models (LLMs) on the
task of text simplification ( TS). We examine
how well off-the-shelf LLMs can solve this
challenging task, assessing a total of 44 mod-
els, differing in size, architecture, pre-training
methods, and accessibility, on three test sets
from different domains (Wikipedia, news, and
medical) under a few-shot setting. Our anal-
ysis considers a suite of automatic metrics as
well as a large-scale quantitative investigation
into the types of common edit operations per-
formed by the different models. Furthermore,
we perform a manual qualitative analysis on
a subset of model outputs to better gauge the
quality of the generated simplifications. Our
evaluation indicates that the best LLMs, despite
not being trained on TS, perform comparably
with state-of-the-art TS baselines. Addition-
ally, we find that certain LLMs demonstrate a
greater range and diversity of edit operations.
Our performance benchmark will be available
as a resource for the development of future TS
methods and evaluation metrics.1
1 Introduction
Large pre-trained language models (LLMs) have
demonstrated strong performance on a wide range
of NLP tasks without the need for task-specific
fine-tuning, leading to a prevailing conventional
wisdom that LLMs can solve any task. This has
motivated the development of benchmarks to better
understand the abilities of LLMs in specific do-
mains such as healthcare (Sallam, 2023), finance
(Dowling and Lucey, 2023), education (Baidoo-
Anu and Owusu Ansah, 2023), engineering (Soba-
1We make our code and the generated system outputs
available at https://github.com/ZurichNLP/BLESS.
†These authors contributed equally.
*Work done as a PhD student at the University of Manch-
ester, United Kingdom.
nia et al., 2023), and ethics (Zhuo et al., 2023),
as well as for specific NLP tasks (Li et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023).
However, it remains unclear how well current
LLMs can perform on the challenging task of text
simplification (TS). In this paper, we focus on sen-
tence simplification in English, which typically
involves rephrasing part or all of a sentence into
language which is more accessible and easier to
understand. While recent work has focused on
evaluating TS abilities of select models, such as
GPT-3.5-Turbo (Feng et al., 2023) and mT5 (Ryan
et al., 2023), there is currently no large-scale and
detailed analysis of the simplification capabilities
of different LLMs.
In this study, we expand both the breadth and
depth of the knowledge base on TS with LLMs,
evaluating a wider variety of models on three dif-
ferent TS datasets: ASSET (Alva-Manchego et al.,
2020a), NEWSELA (Jiang et al., 2020) and MED-
EAS I (Basu et al., 2023). We select these datasets
to cover a variety of domains (Wikipedia, news,
and medical) and a diverse set of TS operations
(e.g. paraphrasing, splitting, and elaboration).
Specifically, we use in-context learning (ICL)
and assess LLMs in a few-shot setting, experi-
menting with three different prompts. We select
44 widely used generative models (both open and
closed-weight) and evaluate their abilities from
three distinct angles. First, we rely on automatic
evaluation metrics commonly used in the TS liter-
ature. Second, we quantify and compare the edit
operations performed by the LLMs during simplifi-
cation. Finally, we perform a targeted qualitative
analysis to validate our findings and to better under-
stand the quality of the generated simplifications.
Our findings reveal that closed-weight models pro-
vide significant gains over open-weight alternatives
under a few-shot setting, establishing them as a
13291

===== PAGE 2 =====
strong baseline for future work on TS. We summa-
rize our contributions as follows:
1. BLESS ( Benchmarking Large language
modEls on Sentence Simplification), a per-
formance evaluation benchmark of 44 LLMs
in a few-shot setting (Section 3).
2. An evaluation that includes both widely used
automatic metrics and an analysis of the TS
edit operations performed by the models (Sec-
tion 4).
3. A qualitative analysis of the results, with man-
ual annotation of simplification operations and
an examination of the relationships between
selected evaluation metrics (Section 5).
2 Related Work
Text Simplification Benchmarks Most simpli-
fication work treats the task as a monolingual
machine translation problem, training models
on datasets containing complex-simple sentence
pairs (Zhu et al., 2010). Alva-Manchego et al.
(2020b) performed a standardized evaluation of
general data-driven simplification systems, using
Wikipedia-based datasets and NEWSELA . At the
document level, Alva-Manchego et al. (2019b) con-
ducted a systematic analysis of simplification op-
erations to demonstrate the limitations and disrup-
tions that occur when multiple sentences are in-
volved. Benchmarks have also been established for
more specific kinds of simplification: for example,
both non-neural (Paetzold and Specia, 2016) and
neural (Stajner et al., 2022; Saggion et al., 2022)
approaches to lexical simplification, which aims to
replace complex words with simpler alternatives.
LLM-based Simplification LLMs such as
GPT-3.5-Turbo, the model behind early versions
of ChatGPT2, are often used out-of-the-box with-
out any further training for a given domain or
task. Some previous works have investigated sim-
plification capabilities of select LLMs in order
to benchmark performance against dedicated ap-
proaches (Aumiller and Gertz, 2022; Vásquez-
Rodríguez et al., 2022; Ryan et al., 2023; Sun et al.,
2023; Chi et al., 2023). Meanwhile, Feng et al.
(2023) explored the TS abilities of the two strong-
performing OpenAI models, GPT-3.5-Turbo and
Davinci-003. However, despite these efforts, we
only have results from a very limited number of
LLMs and evaluation metrics. Thus, it remains un-
2https://chat.openai.com/
Dataset Domain Size # Words # R TER
C S
ASSET Wikipedia 359 22.57 18.87 10 16.79
MED-EASI Medical 300 26.48 27.42 1 25.03
NEWSELA News 256 26.44 24.82 4 23.17
Table 1: Dataset Statistics. C: Complex; S: Simple; R:
References. TER refers to Translation Error Rate, a
measurement of the average edit distance between the
source and reference texts (see https://www.cs.umd.
edu/~snover/tercom).
clear how a wider spectrum of models, differing in
architecture and training strategy, perform on differ-
ent domains and in response to different prompts.
We aim to fill this gap and study the simplification
abilities of 44 LLMs in order to highlight potential
weaknesses and determine areas for further devel-
opment. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to focus on establishing the performance of
recent LLMs on the task of TS.
3 BLESS: Benchmarking Large
Language Models on Sentence
Simplification
3.1 Datasets
Our assessment establishes the performance of cur-
rent LLMs on TS according to three datasets, cov-
ering different domains and styles. Table 1 summa-
rizes these datasets.
ASSET (Alva-Manchego et al., 2020a) com-
prises 2,359 sentences from English Wikipedia
paired with 10 simplified references. We use the
official test split (359 sentences) for evaluation.
These references were created by crowdworkers
who were instructed to use edit operations such as
replacement, splitting, and deletion.
MED-EAS I (Basu et al., 2023) is a simplifica-
tion dataset for short medical texts containing 1,979
complex (expert) - simple (layman) pairs. Each
text contains one or more sentences. In this dataset,
simplified texts are composed using four types of
operations: elaboration, replacement, deletion, and
insertion. We use the released test split (300 in-
stances) for our evaluation. Unlike the other two
datasets, simplifications in MED-EAS I are slightly
longer than the complex source texts, due to ex-
planation and decomposition of complex medical
terms.
NEWSELA (Xu et al., 2015) contains 1,130 long-
form news articles that have been professionally
13292

===== PAGE 3 =====
rewritten according to four different graded read-
ability levels. For our benchmarking experiments,
we opt for the Newsela-Manual test set (Jiang et al.,
2020). We extract all aligned and partially aligned
sentence pairs between a complex source sentence
(level 0) and the four simplified article versions
(levels 1-4), keeping only those sentences for which
we have a reference for all four simplification lev-
els.3 This results in 256 test examples. Using
this small subset of NEWSELA data ensures that
sentence-level alignments are of high quality and
capture important edit operations such as splitting.
3.2 LLM Types
We investigate a total of 44 LLMs with different
sizes, architectures, and training objectives. The
models we consider range from 60 million to 176
billion parameters and are all based on the trans-
former architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), consist-
ing of either an encoder-decoder or a standalone
decoder. Furthermore, all have undergone a self-
supervised pre-training stage. Nine of these mod-
els leverage instruction-tuning, which fine-tunes
a pre-trained base model on labeled instruction-
response pairs from a diverse set of tasks. Finally,
just three of these models have received additional
training through reinforcement learning with hu-
man feedback (RLHF) to better align the model’s
responses with human preferences (Stiennon et al.,
2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). Evaluating a wide vari-
ety of currently available models should serve as a
broad baseline and give sufficient information on
which models perform best in which domains as
well as where key challenges remain.
We broadly distinguish between open- and
closed-weight models. The former pertains to mod-
els for which the trained weights are accessible and
thus allow for self-hosting. Typically, these models
are considered to be “open-source.” However, we
note that this obfuscates specific licensing agree-
ments attached to some models and whether or not
the training data and code are also made available.
In comparison, closed-weight models refer to those
whose weights are kept private and can be queried
only through APIs. Our open-weight models in-
clude variants of the T5 family (Raffel et al., 2020),
GPT-style models (Radford et al., 2019; Wang and
Komatsuzaki, 2021), OPT (Zhang et al., 2022c)
3These articles are simplified as a whole to match the
desired school grade; therefore, there is no guarantee that
there will be an exact match for all the sentences in the text
across all grade levels.
and LLaMA models (Touvron et al., 2023), and the
BLOOM family (Scao et al., 2022). For closed-weight
models, we focus on those developed by OpenAI.
Details on each model family are provided in Ap-
pendix A.
3.3 Prompts
To simplify sentences with LLMs without addi-
tional fine-tuning, we use in-context learning (ICL).
ICL is a prompting technique that utilizes a small
number of input-output examples to demonstrate a
task (Brown et al., 2020). Previous work on related
tasks has demonstrated that LLMs are sensitive to
which input prompts and few-shot examples are
used (Zhang et al., 2022b; Lu et al., 2022; Agrawal
et al., 2023). To account for this, we construct
three stylistically distinct prompts that consist of
a task instruction and N few-shot examples (see
Figure 1). For all generation settings, we set N=3
and randomly sample complex-source pairs from
the corresponding validation sets. We leave a de-
tailed investigation of optimal in-context learning
strategies for TS to future work.
3.4 Inference Settings
For open-weight models, we run inference on local
GPUs using the Transformers library (Wolf et al.,
2020). We load the models with 8-bit quantiza-
tion (Dettmers et al., 2022), which allows us to run
inference efficiently on as few as 5 A100 80GB
GPUs. For closed-weight models, we use the APIs
provided by OpenAI. As generation hyperparam-
eters, we use Nucleus Sampling (Holtzman et al.,
2020) with a probability threshold of 0.9, a temper-
ature of 1.0, and a maximum output length of 100
tokens. To account for the stochastic generation
settings, we perform each inference run with 3 dif-
ferent random seeds and aggregate the results for
each metric.
3.5 Baselines
We use the MUSS (Martin et al., 2022) model
as our main baseline since it has been shown
to achieve state-of-the-art performance. MUSS
fine-tunes a BART-large (Lewis et al., 2020)
model with ACCESS control tokens (Martin
et al., 2020) extracted from labeled TS datasets
and/or mined paraphrases to train both su-
pervised ( MUSS-wiki-mined) and unsupervised
(MUSS-mined) TS systems. We use the suggested
hyperparameters from the original paper to set the
control tokens for simplification generation.
13293
