===== PAGE 1 =====
Proceedings of the 18th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA 2023), pages 610–625
July 13, 2023c⃝2023 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evaluating Reading Comprehension Exercises Generated by LLMs:
A Showcase of ChatGPT in Education Applications
Changrong Xiao1, Sean Xin Xu 1, Kunpeng Zhang 2, Yufang Wang 3, Lei Xia 4
1School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University
2Department of Decision, Operations & Information Technologies, University of Maryland
3Beijing Xicheng Educational Research Institute
4Shawn Tech
xcr21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuxin@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn,
kpzhang@umd.edu, wangwang7587@163.com, xialei@shawntech.com.cn
Abstract
The recent advancement of pre-trained Large
Language Models (LLMs), such as OpenAI’s
ChatGPT, has led to transformative changes
across fields. For example, developing intel-
ligent systems in the educational sector that
leverage the linguistic capabilities of LLMs
demonstrates a visible potential. Though re-
searchers have recently explored how Chat-
GPT could possibly assist in student learning,
few studies have applied these techniques to
real-world classroom settings involving teach-
ers and students. In this study, we implement
a reading comprehension exercise generation
system that provides high-quality and person-
alized reading materials for middle school En-
glish learners in China. Extensive evaluations
of the generated reading passages and corre-
sponding exercise questions, conducted both
automatically and manually, demonstrate that
the system-generated materials are suitable for
students and even surpass the quality of ex-
isting human-written ones. By incorporating
first-hand feedback and suggestions from expe-
rienced educators, this study serves as a mean-
ingful pioneering application of ChatGPT, shed-
ding light on the future design and implementa-
tion of LLM-based systems in the educational
context.
1 Introduction
Reading comprehension is a vital skill that English
learners need to develop and master. Chinese mid-
dle school students, for instance, are required to do
numerous English practices, including reading at
least 150,000 words of supplemental materials to
enhance their reading abilities, as mandated by the
English Curriculum Standards.
Through interviews with experienced English
teachers in Beijing, we discovered a challenge
faced by both educators and students: the repeated
use of outdated reading materials, with only minor
modifications made, if any. For instance, Grade 8
students are likely to practice the same exercises
used by their predecessors in the previous academic
year (currently Grade 9 students). English teachers
believe that offering up-to-date, engaging reading
exercises tailored to each student’s capabilities and
interests can spark their enthusiasm for learning
and ultimately boost their English proficiency.
However, obtaining a large collection of diverse,
customized, high-quality English reading exercises
proves to be a non-trivial task. There is an abun-
dance of articles in newspapers, magazines, text-
books, and children’s books from English-speaking
countries that could serve as potential sources
of reading materials for middle school students.
Nonetheless, adjustments and rewrites are typically
necessary due to variations in topic, length, and
difficulty level. Moreover, even for veteran teach-
ers, crafting appropriate exercise questions based
on textual materials is still not easy.
Pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs)
have been proposed by researchers as a means to
address this labor-intensive and unscalable issue
(Zhai, 2022; Dwivedi et al., 2023). Reading com-
prehension exercises typically consist of two com-
ponents: a lengthy, coherent passage and several
multiple-choice questions that align with its con-
tent. To generate such exercises, it is essential for
LLMs to possess an advanced understanding and
inference ability of human language. While the
generation of long texts (such as stories, news arti-
cles, and poems) (Li et al., 2021) and question-and-
answer (Q&A) pairs (Kurdi et al., 2020) have been
extensively studied, existing task-specific models
fall short of meeting our needs. For instance,
the generated content still remains distinguishable
from human-written text, and the level of personal-
ization for different learners is inadequate (Kurdi
et al., 2020), making these models unsuitable for
direct application in educational settings.
Recently, OpenAI released ChatGPT1, a versa-
tile and interactive chatbot that outperforms state-
1https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt
610

===== PAGE 2 =====
of-the-art models in various NLP tasks, even in
zero-shot or few-shot scenarios. This powerful
LLM presents numerous opportunities for educa-
tion, including the creation of reading materials and
customized practice questions. In this study, we at-
tempt to develop a system for middle school teach-
ers and students that leverages ChatGPT to gener-
ate reading comprehension exercises. Guided by
carefully crafted prompts, ChatGPT can produce
personalized reading passages and multiple-choice
questions of high quality. To assess the generated
exercises and the overall system, human evaluators
(comprising students, teachers, and native speak-
ers) conducted an extensive analysis, determining
that the system holds promise for implementation
in middle schools and has the potential to make a
significant educational impact. In summary, this
study makes threefold contributions:
• We fully leverage the capabilities of the state-
of-the-art LLMs to tackle complex and com-
pound tasks, integrating them within a care-
fully designed education system2. The read-
ing passages and exercise questions generated
by our system significantly surpass the quality
of those produced by previous models, with
some even exceeding the standard of human-
written textbook exercises.
• To the best of our knowledge, our reading ex-
ercise generation system is among the first
applications of ChatGPT in the education con-
text. The system has been utilized by middle
school English teachers, making real impacts
in schools.
• We gather feedback from both experts and gen-
eral users regarding the efficacy of our system.
We believe this is valuable, as there are few
instances of ChatGPT applications being em-
ployed in real-world educational settings. Our
findings offer insights for future researchers
and practitioners to develop more effective
AI-driven educational systems.
2 Related Work
LLM and Controllable Text Generation With
the emergence of Transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017), LLMs have been performing remarkably
well and showing considerable progress across a
2The codes for our system is avail-
able at https://github.com/Xiaochr/
Reading-Exercise-Generation-System .
variety of NLP tasks (Qiu et al., 2020). For ex-
ample, OpenAI’s GPT series models are power-
ful LLMs that perform well in long open-ended
text generation. While they are able to generate
texts of high fluency, researchers have found that
as the generated text gets longer, it starts to wander,
switch to unrelated topics, and become incoherent
(Rashkin et al., 2020). By fine-tuning with specific
domain data or applying some plug-and-play ap-
proaches like PPLM (Dathathri et al., 2020), LLMs
will obtain some controllability and generate more
coherent text, though the quality is still limited.
ChatGPT is developed on the foundation of GPT-
3.5 or GPT-4 architectures, with the inclusion of ad-
ditional human-directed instructions for enhanced
performance. It possesses robust in-context learn-
ing capabilities, enabling it to interpret require-
ments specified in input prompts without the need
for additional information (zero-shot learning), or
by utilizing a minimal number of provided exam-
ples (few-shot learning). Even without massive
domain knowledge, ChatGPT is able to follow hu-
man instructions and generate text of higher quality.
For instance, to generate a 200-word reading pas-
sage on the topic of school life, one simply needs
to specify the subject and length requirements in
the prompt to ChatGPT.
ChatGPT in Education With the thriving of
AI technology, its applications in education have
been increasing, transforming ways of teaching
and learning (Zhang and Aslan, 2021). Recog-
nizing the surprising capacity of LLMs, such as
ChatGPT, researchers have been discussing their
enormous potential impacts in various educational
scenarios (Zhai, 2022). Some studies (Dwivedi
et al., 2023; Pettinato Oltz, 2023) suggested that
ChatGPT can provide students with basic educa-
tional materials. LLMs are trained on vast corpora
created by humans to “learn” the language, and now
they can “teach” human learners what they have
already learned. Moreover, inherent to its chatbot
characteristics, ChatGPT can function as a personal
tutor, providing real-time feedback (Zentner, 2022),
personalized evaluations and suggestions (Baidoo-
Anu and Owusu Ansah, 2023; Zhang, 2023), and
other learning supports (Dwivedi et al., 2023), such
as improving the engagement and autonomy of stu-
dents (Firat, 2023) and addressing the low teacher-
student ratio problem (Chen et al., 2023).
On the other hand, the misuse of ChatGPT has
existed since its release (Zhang et al., 2023). A poll
611

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 done by Study.com (an online course provider)
reveals that 89% of the participating students uti-
lized ChatGPT for homework and 48% of them
confessed to using ChatGPT for at-home tests. It
is important and still under exploration to design
suitable learning tasks and systems that can guide
students to use ChatGPT properly as a helpful learn-
ing assistant.
Evaluation of Long Text Generation To eval-
uate the quality of the generated long text, re-
searchers have developed several metrics, including
Self-BLEU (Zhu et al., 2018) andn-gram repetition
score (Welleck et al., 2020). They are often unreli-
able and inconsistent with human judgment (Belz
et al., 2020). Therefore, human evaluation remains
the gold standard for most long text generation
tasks, even if it is expensive and time-consuming
(Celikyilmaz et al., 2020).
Belz and Reiter (2006) grouped the common
human evaluation approaches into intrinsic and ex-
trinsic ones. Most current text generation tasks are
measured with intrinsic human evaluations, where
participants are asked to rate the quality of the
generated text, either overall or along with some
designed dimensions (e.g., fluency, coherence, and
correctness) (Celikyilmaz et al., 2020). Likert and
sliding scale are commonly used scoring methods,
despite the many limitations (e.g., inconsistency,
not straightforward) (Celikyilmaz et al., 2020). To
address this, comparative approaches, such as rank-
ing, have been proposed and found to achieve high
inter-annotator agreement (Callison-Burch et al.,
2007). On the other hand, the extrinsic evaluation
measures how successful a system is in downstream
tasks, from both a user’s success in a task and the
system’s success in fulfilling its purpose (Celikyil-
maz et al., 2020; Hastie and Belz, 2014).
3 Methods
3.1 Reading passage Generation Baseline
We use a fine-tuned GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
with PPLM (Dathathri et al., 2020) control as the
baseline method to generate reading passages. The
two-stage development of the baseline model is
shown in Figure 1.
In the first step, we fine-tune our base LLM,
GPT-2 medium, using two reading datasets ob-
tained from middle school teachers: supplemental
3https://futurism.com/the-byte/
students-admit-chatgpt-homework
Figure 1: The fine-tuned GPT-2 + PPLM baseline
reading materials (Dataset 1) and textbook exercise
passages that are currently used in middle schools
(Dataset 2). We adopt a two-step fine-tuning strat-
egy with varying learning rates to accommodate
the distinct characteristics of each dataset. In the
second step, we employ PPLM, a plug-and-play
controllable text generation approach, to guide the
fine-tuned language model in generating more co-
herent passages based on specified topic keywords.
For more details, please refer to the Appendix A.
3.2 ChatGPT for Reading Exercise
Generation
Utilizing the impressive capabilities of ChatGPT,
we manually design input prompts to generate high-
quality reading comprehension passages without
the need for fine-tuning or additional control meth-
ods. In this study, we produce textual content in
two settings: zero-shot and one-shot, which allow
us to control the output to varied degrees.
In the zero-shot setting, we instructed ChatGPT
to be a helpful learning assistant capable of gener-
ating high-quality reading passages in the system
prompt. We provided customized requirements
within the conversation prompt, including length,
genre, difficulty level, and topics. In addition to cre-
ating reading passages from scratch, teachers often
source content from the web or other materials and
seek to adapt them into suitable reading passages
for students. Thus we added an extra requirement,
a referenced passage, in the one-shot setting.
We also generate questions and correspond-
ing answers for given passages using appropriate
prompts. We set the number of questions, the num-
ber of options per question, and the question type
for customization in the input prompt. ChatGPT
can generate exercise questions based on either
a passage it previously created or a passage pro-
vided by users. Moreover, an extra toxicity check
is applied before the generated exercises are made
available to teachers and students.
We will describe the process of reading exer-
cise generation using ChatGPT and the design of
appropriate prompts in Appendix B.
612
