===== PAGE 1 =====
Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Generation, Evaluation and Metrics (GEM² 2025), pages 129–150
July 31 - August 1, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics
Free-text Rationale Generation under Readability Level Control
Yi-Sheng Hsu1,2,5 Nils Feldhus1,3,4 Sherzod Hakimov2
1German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
2Computational Linguistics, Department of Linguistics, Universität Potsdam
3Quality and Usability Lab, Technische Universität Berlin
4BIFOLD ± Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data
5Computer Science Institute, Hochschule Ruhr West
yi-sheng.hsu@hs-ruhrwest.de feldhus@tu-berlin.de
Abstract
Free-text rationales justify model decisions in
natural language and thus become likable and
accessible among approaches to explanation
across many tasks. However, their effectiveness
can be hindered by misinterpretation and hallu-
cination. As a perturbation test, we investigate
how large language models (LLMs) perform
rationale generation under the effects of read-
ability level control, i.e., being prompted for an
explanation targeting a specific expertise level,
such as sixth grade or college. We find that
explanations are adaptable to such instruction,
though the observed distinction between read-
ability levels does not fully match the defined
complexity scores according to traditional read-
ability metrics. Furthermore, the generated ra-
tionales tend to feature medium level complex-
ity, which correlates with the measured quality
using automatic metrics. Finally, our human
annotators confirm a generally satisfactory im-
pression on rationales at all readability levels,
with high-school-level readability being most
commonly perceived and favored. 1
1 Introduction
Over the past few years, the rapid development
of machine learning methods has drawn consid-
erable attention to the research field of explain-
able artificial intelligence (XAI). While conven-
tional approaches focused more on local or global
analyses of rules and features ( Casalicchio et al. ,
2019; Zhang et al. , 2021), the recent development
of LLMs introduced more dynamic methodologies
along with their enhanced capability of natural lan-
guage generation (NLG). The self-explanation po-
tentials of LLMs have been explored in a variety of
approaches, such as examining free-text rationales
(Wiegreffe et al. , 2021) or combining LLM output
with saliency maps ( Huang et al. , 2023).
1Disclaimer: The article contains offensive or hateful
materials, which is inevitable in the nature of the work.
Although natural language explanation (NLE)
established itself to be among the most common
approaches to justify LLM predictions ( Zhu et al. ,
2024), free-text rationales were found to poten-
tially misalign with the predictions and thereby mis-
lead human readers, for whom such misalignment
seems hardly perceivable ( Ye and Durrett , 2022).
Furthermore, it remains unexplored whether free-
text rationales represent a model’s decision making,
or if they are generated just like any other NLG out-
put regarding faithfulness. In light of this, we aim
to examine whether free-text rationales can also
be controlled through perturbation as demonstrated
on NLG tasks ( Dathathri et al. , 2020; Imperial and
Madabushi, 2023). If more dispersed text complex-
ity could be observed in the rationales, it would
indicate a higher resemblance between rationales
and common NLG output, as we assume the LLMs
to undergo a consistent decision making process on
the same instance even under different instructions.
Targeting free-text rationales, we control text
complexity with descriptive readability levels and
evaluate the generated rationales under various
frameworks to investigate what effects additional
instructions or constraints may bring forward to the
NLE task (Figure 1). Although the impact of read-
ability ( Stajner, 2021) has rarely been addressed
for NLEs, establishing such a connection could
benefit model explainability, which ultimately aims
at perception ( Ehsan et al. , 2019) and utility ( Joshi
et al. , 2023) of diverse human recipients.
Our study makes the following contributions:
First, we explore LLM output in both prediction
and free-text rationalization under the influence of
readability level control. Second, we apply objec-
tive metrics to evaluate the rationales and measure
their quality across text complexity. Finally, we test
how human perceive the complexity and quality of
129

===== PAGE 2 =====
Figure 1: The experiment workflow of the current study. The demonstrated example comes from the HateXplain
dataset. Generated responses are evaluated by both automatic metrics and human annotations.
the rationales across different readability levels.
2
2 Background
Text complexity The notion of text complexity
was brought forward in early studies to measure
how readers of various education levels compre-
hend a given text (
Kincaid et al. , 1975). Prior to
recent developments of NLP, text complexity was
approximated through metrics including Flesch
Reading Ease (FRE, Kincaid et al. , 1975), Gunning
fox index (GFI, Gunning, 1952), and Coleman-
Liau index (CLI, Coleman and Liau , 1975) (Ap-
pendix B). These approaches quantify readability
through formulas considering factors like sentence
length, word counts, and syllable counts.
As the most common readability metric, FRE
was often mapped to descriptions that bridge be-
tween numeric scores and educational levels ( Fara-
jidizaji et al. , 2024). Ribeiro et al. (2023) ap-
plied readability level control to text summarization
through instruction-prompting. In their study, de-
scriptive categories were prompted for assigning
desired text complexity to LLM output.
NLE metrics Although the assessment of ex-
plainable models lacks a unified standard, main-
stream approaches employ either objective or
2https://github.com/doyouwantsometea/nle_
readability
FRE >80 60-80 40-60 <40
Readability sixth middle high collegeLevel grade school school
Table 1: The mapping between FRE scores and read-
ability levels adapted from Ribeiro et al. (2023).
human-in-the-loop evaluation ( Vilone and Longo ,
2021). Objective metric scores include LAS ( Hase
et al. , 2020), REV ( Chen et al. , 2023), and RORA
(Jiang et al. , 2024c). Their training processes
highly rely on a particular data structure, which
does not generalize to tasks relevant to readabil-
ity. Furthermore, while most studies on NLE in-
tuitively presume model-generated rationales to
bridge between model input and output, it remains
unclear whether the provided reasoning faithfully
represents its internal process for output genera-
tion; in other words, free-text rationales could be
only reflecting what the model has learned from its
training data ( Atanasova et al. , 2023).
3 Method
Readability level control As demonstrated in
Figure 1, in step 1, we incorporate instruction-
prompting into the prompt building. The prompts
consist of three sections: task description, few-shot
in-context samples, and instruction for the test in-
stance. After task description and samples, we
130

===== PAGE 3 =====
add a statement aiming for the rationale: Elabo-
rate the explanation in {length} 3 to a {readabil-
ity_level} student. Then we iterate through the data
instances and readability levels in separate sessions.
We adapt the framework of Ribeiro et al. (2023) to
four readability levels based on FRE score ranges
(Table 1) and explore a range of desired FRE scores
among {30, 50, 70, 90}, which are respectively
phrased in the prompts as readability levels {col-
lege, high school, middle school, sixth grade}.
Evaluating free-text rationales In light of the
problematic adaption to readability-related tasks
and major issues in reproducibility of the afore-
mentioned NLE evaluation metrics, we exploit the
overlap between NLE and NLG, we adopt TIGER-
Score ( Jiang et al. , 2024b), an NLG metric that is
widely applicable to most tasks, for evaluating the
generated free-text rationales (§ 4.2). Applying fine-
tuned Llama-2 (Touvron et al. , 2023), the metric
was proposed to require little reference but instead
rely on error analysis over prompted contexts to
identify and grade mistakes in unstructured text.
Nevertheless, the approach could sometimes suffer
from hallucination (or confabulation), similar to
the common LLM-based methodologies.
4 Experiments
4.1 Rationale generation
Datasets We conduct readability-controlled ratio-
nale generation on three NLP tasks: fact-checking,
hate speech detection, and natural language infer-
ence (NLI), adopting the datasets featuring explana-
tory annotations. For fact-checking, HealthFC
(Vladika et al. , 2024) includes 750 claims for fact-
checking under the medical domain, with excerpts
of human-written explanations provided along with
the verification labels. For hate speech detection,
two datasets are applied: (1) HateXplain (Mathew
et al. , 2021), which consists of 20k Tweets with
human-highlighted keywords that contribute the
most to the labels. (2) Contextual Abuse Dataset
(CAD, Vidgen et al. , 2021), which contains 25k en-
tries with six unique labels elaborating the context
under which hatred is expressed. Lastly, SpanEx
(Choudhury et al. , 2023) is an NLI dataset that
includes annotations on word-level semantic rela-
tions (Appendix A.1).
3Throughout the experiments, we set this to a fixed value
of “three sentences” .
Models We select four recent open-weight LLMs
from three different families: Mistral-0.2 7B
(Jiang et al. , 2023), Mixtral-0.1 8x7B (Jiang
et al. , 2024a)4, OpenChat-3.5 7B (Wang et al. ),
and Llama-3 8B (Dubey et al. , 2024). All the mod-
els are instruction-tuned variants downloaded from
Hugging Face, using the default generation settings,
running on NVIDIA A100 GPU.
4.2 Evaluation
Task accuracy We use accuracy scores to assess
the alignment between the model predictions and
the gold labels processed from the datasets. In
HateXplain (Mathew et al. , 2021), since different
annotators could label the same instance differently,
we adopt the most frequent one as the gold label.
Similarly, in CAD (Vidgen et al. , 2021), we disre-
gard the subcategories under ªoffensiveº label to
reduce complexity, simplifying the task into binary
classification and leaving the subcategories as the
source of building reference rationales.
Readability metrics We choose three conven-
tional readability metrics: FRE ( Kincaid et al. ,
1975), GFI ( Gunning, 1952), and CLI ( Coleman
and Liau , 1975) to approximate the complexity of
the rationales. While a higher FRE score indicates
more readable text, higher GFI and CLI scores im-
ply higher text complexity (Appendix B).
TIGERScore We compute TIGERScore ( Jiang
et al. , 2024b), which provides explanations in addi-
tion to the numeric scores. The metric is described
by the formula:
{E1, E 2, . . . , E n} = f(I, x, y ′) (1)
where f is a function that takes the following in-
puts: I (instruction), x (source context), and y′
(system output). The function f output a set of
structured errors {E1, E 2, . . . , E n}. For each error
Ei = ( li, a i, e i, s i), li denotes the error location,
ai represents a predefined error aspect, ei is a free-
text explanation of the error, and si is the score
reduction ∈ [−5, −0.5] associated with the error.
At the instance level, the overall metric score is the
summation of the score reductions for all errors:
TIGERScore = ∑n
i=1 si.
The native scorer is based on Llama-2 (Tou-
vron et al. , 2023). In addition to Llama-2, we
4Owing to the larger size of Mixtral-v0.1 8x7B , we
adopt a bitsandbytes 4-bit quantized version ( https://hf.
co/ybelkada/Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1-bnb-4bit )
to reduce memory consumption.
131
