===== PAGE 1 =====
. 
. 
 Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3690712.3690718
. 
. 
 RESEARCH-ARTICLE
Generating Educational Materials with Diﬀerent Levels of Readability
using LLMs
CHIEHYANG HUANG
. 
 JING WEI
. 
 TING HAO KENNETH HUANG, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, United
States
. 
. 
. 
 Open Access Support provided by:
. 
 Pennsylvania State University
. 
 PDF Download
3690712.3690718.pdf
09 February 2026
Total Citations: 16
Total Downloads: 269
. 
. 
 Published: 11 May 2024
. 
. 
 Citation in BibTeX format
. 
. 
 In2Writing '24: The Third Workshop
on Intelligent and Interactive Writing
Assistants
May 11, 2024
HI, Honolulu, USA
. 
. 
 In2Writing '24: Proceedings of the ird Workshop on Intelligent and Interactive Writing Assistants (May 2024)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/3690712.3690718
ISBN: 9798400710315
.

===== PAGE 2 =====
Generating Educational Materials with Different Levels of
Readability using LLMs
Chieh-Yang Huang
MetaMetrics Inc.
USA
cyhuang@lexile.com
Jing Wei
MetaMetrics Inc.
USA
jwei@lexile.com
Ting-Hao Kenneth Huang
Pennsylvania State University
USA
txh710@psu.edu
Figure 1: Given (A) a source text, (B) a readability level for the source text, and (C) an intended readability level, the leveled-text
generation aims at rewriting the source text in the intended readability level while preserving the meaning. Note that in
this paper, we use a widely adopted readability level in the education context, the Lexile Scale. In the provided example, the
sentences are longer and the words are less common in the resulting text.
Abstract
This study introduces the leveled-text generation task, aiming to
rewrite educational materials to specific readability levels while
preserving meaning. We assess the capability of GPT-3.5, LLaMA-2
70B, and Mixtral 8x7B, to generate content at various readability
levels through zero-shot and few-shot prompting. Evaluating 100
processed educational materials reveals that few-shot prompting
significantly improves performance in readability manipulation and
information preservation. LLaMA-2 70B performs better in achiev-
ing the desired difficulty range, while GPT-3.5 maintains original
meaning. However, manual inspection highlights concerns such
as misinformation introduction and inconsistent edit distribution.
These findings emphasize the need for further research to ensure
the quality of generated educational content.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
In2Writing ’24, May 11, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1031-5/24/05
https://doi.org/10.1145/3690712.3690718
CCS Concepts
• Human-centered computing →Human computer interac-
tion (HCI); • Computing methodologies →Natural language
generation; Machine translation; Natural language processing .
Keywords
Educational Material Generation, Text Readability, Text Generation,
Large Language Model
ACM Reference Format:
Chieh-Yang Huang, Jing Wei, and Ting-Hao Kenneth Huang. 2024. Gen-
erating Educational Materials with Different Levels of Readability using
LLMs. In The Third Workshop on Intelligent and Interactive Writing Assistants
(In2Writing ’24), May 11, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
7 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3690712.3690718
1 Introduction
Prior research has shown that students learn more effectively from
reading materials that match their level of readability, optimally bal-
ancing improvement and cognitive load [8, 20, 28]. Consequently,
curating educational content to meet the diverse reading abilities of
students is a crucial step toward better learning outcomes. Platforms
such as Newsela [2], Simple English Wikipedia [3], and Common-
LIT [1], among others, have developed texts at different levels of
complexity for educational purposes.
The process of rewriting texts to different levels typically in-
volves iterative editing to ensure that the revised texts meet the
desired difficulty criteria. This readability assessment is based on
16

===== PAGE 3 =====
In2Writing ’24, May 11, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Chieh-Yang Huang, Jing Wei, and Ting-Hao Kenneth Huang
various linguistic features, with sentence length and word frequency
identified as key factors in previous studies [ 11]. Although this
process appears straightforward, accurately adjusting these ele-
ments to achieve the target reading difficulty is challenging. This
task becomes even more complex for young learners, where factors
such as decodability [19], information load [15], and other elements
play a significant role [10, 11].
This paper introduces the leveled-text generation task. As
shown in Figure 1, given (A) a source text, (B) the readability level
of the source text, and (C) the desired readability level, the goal is
to rewrite the given text so that the resulting text (i) is within the
desired readability level and (ii) also preserves the original meaning.
As our first attempt at solving the leveled text generation task, we
assess the capability of three LLMs, including GPT-3.5 [21], LLaMA-
2 70B [26], and Mixtral 8x7B [13], to generate content at various
levels of readability through zero-shot and few-shot prompting
techniques. Our evaluation involved 100 educational materials pro-
cessed by GPT-3.5, LLaMA-2 70B, and Mixtral 8x7B. The findings
indicate that providing a few examples will significantly improve
performance in both manipulating the content readability and pre-
serving the same information. This might also suggest that the
concept of the leveled-text generation and Lexile scale does not
inherently exist, as showing examples could help the model under-
stand the task and realize what the texts should look like within
the desired difficulty level. When comparing different LLMs, we
found that LLaMA-2 70B was the most effective in achieving the
desired difficulty range, while GPT-3.5 excelled in maintaining the
meaning of the original text.
We also conducted a manual quality inspection of 10 articles
considering potential concerns if the generated texts were used
as learning materials. Our analysis revealed a few issues: ( i) the
potential for introducing misinformation, particularly in the form of
altered quotations and factual inaccuracies, and (ii) the inconsistent
distribution of edits within the text, leading to an uneven readability
level throughout the article. These findings highlight the need
for further research and development to address these concerns
and ensure the quality of the generated educational content. This
preliminary survey helped us identify five critical points for future
advances in leveled text generation tasks.
2 Related Work
This task is related to ( i) text readability manipulation and ( ii)
educational content generation.
Text Readability Manipulation. Most of the tasks related to manip-
ulating text readability focus on text simplification. S. Bautista et al.
[23] simplified texts through (i) rule-based conversion to sentence
structures and (ii) replacing difficult words with easier synonyms.
Bingel and Søgaard[6] introduced a structured approach to text sim-
plification using conditional random fields on dependency graphs to
predict compressions and paraphrases. Swain et al. [25] developed
an efficient text simplification technique using the WordNet model
in NLTK. Alkaldi and Inkpen [5] trained their own readability clas-
sifier and designed a reinforcement learning framework to train a
text simplification model based on a GRU sequence-to-sequence
model with attention. Alkaldi and Inkpen [5]’s work, however, is
currently only trained in sentence-level simplification. Recent ad-
vancements in LLMs have shown promising results. Feng et al. [9]
investigated zero-shot and few-shot learning capabilities of LLMs,
demonstrating superior performance. Maddela et al. [18]introduced
a hybrid approach combining linguistically-motivated rules with
a neural paraphrasing model. Other studies focused on improving
transparency and explainability. Cristina Garbacea et al. [7] pro-
posed a structured pipeline, analyzing text complexity prediction
and complex component identification.
While these studies have made significant contributions, further
research is needed on generating texts at specific readability levels
(including both increasing and decreasing text readability) while
preserving meaning. Our work on the leveled-text generation task
benchmarks the LLMs performance and explores the possibility of
this new topic.
Educational Content Generation. Recent studies have explored
the potential of large language models (LLMs) in generating educa-
tional content. Leiker et al. [16] investigated the use of LLMs for
creating adult learning content at scale; MacNeil et al. [17] focused
on automatically generating computer science learning materials;
Gao et al. [12] specifically investigated the application of LLMs to
spoken language learning; Jury et al. [14] evaluated LLM-generated
worked examples in an introductory programming course; and Xiao
et al. [27] applied LLMs to generate reading comprehension exer-
cises. Despite the adoption of LLMs in various fields, this particular
work focuses on leveraging their potential for language learning
by rewriting texts to different readability levels.
3 Benchmark the Leveled-Text Generation Task
To establish a first benchmark for the leveled-text generation task,
we compiled a parallel dataset comprising 30K pairs of leveled
texts and experimented with it using three LLMs, namely GPT-3.5,
LLaMA-2 70B, and Mixtral 8x7B. We evaluate the performance
based on two aspects: (i) manipulating readability and (ii) content
preservation.
Note that we chose the Lexile scale as a tool to assess readability,
given its wide adoption in educational settings to measure text
complexity. The Lexile Framework evaluates a student’s reading
skills and the complexity of reading materials on the same scale [20].
This makes it easier for students to choose books that are just right
for their reading level, helping them to enhance their language
skills more effectively. Given its wide adoption in K-12 educational
settings to measure text complexity, we decided that the Lexile
measure was the best fit for our readability analysis.
3.1 Task Definition
As shown in Figure 1, given (A) a source text, (B) a readability level
of the source text, and (C) an intended readability level of the target
text, the leveled-text generation task should rewrite the source text
to meet characteristics within the intended readability level, such
as the vocabulary used, sentence structure, sentence length, and so
on.
The Lexile Framework suggests that readability measures should
rely on different features for different groups of students. For early-
level learners (usually lower than grade 4 or a Lexile level of 750L),
17
