===== PAGE 1 =====
Research on Generative Artificial Intelligence in 
Senior High Schools’ English Reading Teaching  
Yiqing Ding1* 
1College of Foreign Languages, Shanghai Ocean University, 201306 No.999, Huchenghuan Rd, 
Nanhui New City, Shanghai, P.R., China 
Abstract. The advent of generative artificial intelligence (GAI) and the 
prominence of core literacy in senior high school have jointly promoted 
innovative transformations in teaching. This paper employs literature review 
methodology to first examine current problems in senior high school English 
reading class, subsequently proposing GAI ’ s integrative advantages. Then 
further identifies implementation challenges and corresponding 
countermeasures. It is  found that traditional English reading class has 
problems of single reading resources, lacking thinking training and one -
sided reading evaluation system, while GAI can enrich reading materials, 
promote critical thinking, and achieve diversified evaluation . However, 
there are problems of lacking emotional interaction, teachers ’ technical 
dependence and difficulties in changing teaching concepts. Therefore, this 
paper proposes a teacher -led, GAI -assisted emotional interaction 
mechanism, teacher -student-AI tr iadic collaboration, and progressive 
conceptual iteration strategies. The paper shows that the deep integration of 
GAI and English reading teaching needs to balance technological 
empowerment and traditional educational values. 
1 Introduction  
1.1 Background of the study 
The English Curriculum Criteria for Regular High School (2017 Edition, 2020 Revision) 
integrates language, culture, and thinking organically within the core competencies of 
English as a discipline, establishing concrete and feasible academic goals  to achieve moral 
education and disciplinary education [1]. As a pivotal component of senior  high school 
English teaching, reading teaching not only enables teachers to convey information, enhance 
students’ language proficiency and cultural literacy but also serves as a platform for 
cultivating students’ thinking abilities. However, traditional English teaching faces 
challenges such as slow improvement in students’  critical thinking, superficial cultural 
understanding, and a lack of diversity in reading materials. 
Since OpenAI launched ChatGPT in October 2022, generative artificial intelligence (GAI) 
has entered mainstream awareness. By 2024, the conv ening of the World Digital Education 
                                                 
* Corresponding author: 2261107@st.shou.edu.cn 
 
SHS Web of Conferences 222, 01001 (2025)
ICEPCC 2025
https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202522201001
  © The Authors, published by EDP Sciences. This is an open access article distributed under  the terms of  the Creative
Commons Attribution License 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

===== PAGE 2 =====
Conference has brought unprecedented attention to the application of GAI in education. Due 
to its powerful language processing and content generation capabilities, 
GAI can help innovate the way English reading is taught  and improve teaching efficiency 
and student learning outcomes. 
1.2 Literature review 
Since the advent of Chatgpt, GAI has gained widespread attention across academic 
disciplines. Through their research, Bordas et al. demonstrated that GAI can generate entirely 
new datasets—such as text, images, audio, and video—based on existing data[2]. Jauhiainen 
and Guerra stated that ChatGPT -3.5 and 4 can effectively custo mize educational content to 
provide students with personalized, interactive learning materials and environments [3]. For 
example, in a senior high school geography classroom, the Kimi intelligent assistant has been 
shown to optimize instructional design by automating low -level, repetitive evaluation tasks 
for teachers and tailoring personalized learning content for students[4]. In English translation 
teaching, GAI can break spatial and temporal constraints to achieve personalized and 
differentiated teaching, thereby improving the efficiency of translation teaching [5]. Hao et 
al. proposed a framework for designing personalized teaching pathways through AI 
technology, which can be applied to senior high school science education to achieve precision 
teaching[6]. 
Scholars have also focused on integrating GAI into senior high school English teaching. 
Wu points out that English teachers can make reasonable use o f GAI in teaching design, 
lesson preparation, teaching assistance, assessment processes and student engagement, so as 
to improve the quality of teaching [7]. Similarly , Xiang and Li argue that AI empowers 
teachers to provide richer curricular resources, enabling “large-scale, personalized” precision 
teaching[8]. Meanwhile, students can develop self-directed learning skills through AI-driven 
English learning applications or platforms. Furthermore, Chen proposes that GAI -enhanced 
reading practices, mediated through human-AI dialogue, allow readers to efficiently acquire, 
process, and comprehend information while fulfilling demands for intelligent and 
personalized reading experiences[9]. 
In summary, scholars globally acknowledge the significant rol e of GAI in education, 
providing a robust theoretical foundation for its integration into English teaching. However, 
Rahman and Watanobe cautioned that despite ChatGPT’s utility in educational research, it 
remains constrained by limitations such as a lack of common sense, potential biases, 
difficulties in complex reasoning, and an inability to process visual information, arguing 
against uncritical reliance on the technology[10]. Additionally, Zhang and Wang highlighted 
challenges in digital reading, including data -driven limitations, superficial comprehension, 
and passive information consumption. To address these issues, they emphasized the need for 
teachers to focus on cultivating students’ ability to actively select resources, enhance human-
AI interactivity to avoid homogenization, and develop critical textual analysis skills in 
classroom settings[11]. 
1.3 Research topic 
Existing studies still exhibit critical gaps. While current studies point out GAI ’s potential 
ability in the educational field, such as assisting in teaching design and realizing personalized 
teaching, etc. They also put forward its limitations and coping strategies in the teaching 
process. However, there is a lack of in -depth and systematic research on how to use GAI in 
a concrete and rational way to address the problems in traditional senior high school English 
reading classrooms. 
 
SHS Web of Conferences 222, 01001 (2025)
ICEPCC 2025
https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202522201001
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Therefore, this paper aims to explore the effective path of integrating GAI tools into 
senior high school English reading teaching class. The findings will offer practical cases and 
theoretical support for the deep fusion of educational tech nology within subject -specific 
teaching, thereby advancing the modernization of education. 
2 Problems in the traditional senior high school English reading 
classroom  
2.1 Homogeneity of reading materials 
Most teachers believe that textbooks are the syllabus of English language teaching[12], with 
classroom content mainly centered on prescribed materials. However, textbooks materials 
mostly focus on academic genres such as expository, argumentative, and narrative essays, 
and lack authentic language materials such as original novels, overseas social media, and 
TED talks. 
Furthermore, the updating rate of textbooks is much slower than the development of the 
times, resulting in outdated and contextually irrelevant content [13]. For example, the 
People’s Education Press textbooks, which are the most widely used in China, were compiled 
in 1984, 1996, and 2003[14]. The latest version textbook was not until 2017 that began to be 
written, and it was gradually put into use in 2019. The sluggish revision pace fails to 
incorporate real-time hotspots such as artificial intelligence and digital economy in a timely 
manner, resulting in a serious disconnect between classroom knowledge and contemporary 
realities. Consequently, students are unable to access diverse cultures and global dynamics 
through reading, limiting their preparedness for an interconnected world. 
2.2 Neglect thinking training in the reading process 
Reading teaching serves as a critical pathway to promote students ’ thinking progress[15]. 
However, fixed teaching hours and limited teacher energy often lead teachers to dominate 
classroom discourse to complete curricular tasks on schedule. Consequently, students 
passively absorb the general meaning of the text, vocabulary, grammar and other knowledge, 
with minimal opportunities to question, discuss and share their own opinions on the text. This 
not only fails to stimulate students ’ critical questioning or personalized interpretation skills, 
but also makes reading lessons monotonous and reduces students’ motivation to read deeply 
and think independently[16]. For example, in cross-cultural discourse teaching, teachers only 
introduce the cult ural background with the help of images and audio [17], failing to guide 
students to conduct classroom discussions, comparative analysis of cultures of different 
countries and other thinking inquiry activities [18]. Such practices not only lead to students ’ 
shallow understanding of different culture, but also lead to a serious lack of critical training. 
2.3 One-sided evaluation system of reading 
Traditional assessment methods often overemphasize accuracy rates, relying solely on 
standardized test scores to evaluate students ’ reading comprehension abilities, without 
accounting for individual differences in language ability[19]. For example, most of the exams 
are based on objective questions such as multiple-choice questions, which narrowly focus on 
students’ comprehension of factual grasp in the text and mastery of vocabulary and grammar. 
This approach neglects the effective assessment of students’ stage-by-stage progress, such as 
reading fluency, logical reasoning, cross -cultural comparisons, and argumentation skills. 
 
SHS Web of Conferences 222, 01001 (2025)
ICEPCC 2025
https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202522201001
3
